Technical companion
This reference accompanies From SFC Circulars to Reviewable Bank Controls. The mono-
graph explains the decisions, mathematics and limits of the control method. This com-
panion begins with the implemented investigation through the round-four checkpoint,
then retains provision inventories, field definitions, software interfaces, historical im-
plementation records and commands for people reproducing or auditing the work. It
uses public sources and synthetic cases. Its execution records do not establish indepen-
dent legal approval or readiness for bank production.
The two PDFs are intended to be kept together. References between them link the
reader’s explanation to its reproduction record. All mathematical derivations needed
for the main argument remain in the monograph.
Chak Wong
24 September 2026
i


Contents
Technical companion
i
A Reproducing the implemented investigation
1
A.1 Which route is implemented . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
A.2 Resolve an authority edition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
A.3 Compose separate controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
A.4 Run a case that distinguishes readings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
A.5 Use an oﬀicial example without inventing authority . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
A.6 Present proposals and preserve partial checks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
A.7 Freeze and execute a comparison . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
A.8 Package Java and revisit source changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
A.9 Find the retained evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
B
Technical implementation record
8
B.1
Complete SPI provision inventory
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
B.2
Detailed inputs for the demonstrated Java profile . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
B.3
Full distinguishing-case table . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
C Historical implementation and design record
14
C.1
The shared workbench and its users
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
C.2 What a reviewer should see . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.3
The execution architecture and its deliberate limits . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
C.4
The original work packages and their execution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
C.5
The implemented authoring service and its current boundary
. . . . . .
21
C.6 What the 22 September local execution established . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
C.7
The scripted interpretation increment completed on 23 September . . . .
32
C.8
Extend the existing product at a defined boundary . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
C.9
Separate durable records from generated prose . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
34
C.10 The run and policy records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
C.11 The candidate record carries the interpretive commitment
. . . . . . . .
36
ii


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
CONTENTS
C.12 The issue and action records make automatic work accountable
. . . . .
37
C.13 Coverage records connect source units to consequences . . . . . . . . . .
38
C.14 Storage transactions and event history . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
39
C.15 An API with reviewable state transitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
40
C.16 The review interface should expose the decisive difference
. . . . . . . .
42
C.17 Provider adapters are deliberately narrow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
C.18 Security protects the meaning of the evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
C.19 The ordered implementation sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
45
C.20 Acceptance scenarios that exercise the whole cycle . . . . . . . . . . . . .
47
C.21 The first vertical slice and its completion rule . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
48
D Detailed comparison tables
49
D.1 Ensemble responsibilities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
D.2 Resolution evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
D.3 Software and standards considered . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
51
D.4 Cross-circular acceptance cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
53
D.5 Evaluation evidence contract
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
54
D.6 Operational readiness evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
55
D.7 Recording a method-comparison decision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
56
E
Software interfaces and reproduction notes
57
E.1
The earlier SPI compiler: a concrete deployment lesson
. . . . . . . . . .
57
E.2
The actual generated Java interface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
62
E.3
What can be reused from the adjacent projects
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
E.4
Exact controller sequence
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
66
E.5
Machine-readable blocked-result example . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
E.6
Exact financial-rule serialization
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
E.7
Complete rule-language grammar
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
68
E.8
Durable request accounting and worker recovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
69
E.9
Release identity and reproducible builds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
iii


Appendix A
Reproducing the implemented
investigation
This chapter records the interpretation and integration capabilities accepted through
round four on 24 September 2026. It complements the explanations in the main volume
with exact entry points and retained evidence. Earlier scripted increments are histori-
cal records in Appendix C. Later implementation work has its own dated reports; the
counts here belong to this checkpoint and must not be read as a live resource balance.
A.1 Which route is implemented
The service can generate isolated readings, investigate alternatives with bounded
breadth-first or UCT search, check independently collected source claims, preserve
unsupported proposals and construct draft Java controls.
The source inventories
are collected separately from candidate generation; independence of requests does
not establish statistical independence of errors.
Composition combines explicitly
assigned component controls. Executed scenarios can rank questions when their facts
and outcomes are comparable. Registered oﬀicial examples can supply conditional
arguments. A local scheduler revisits affected controls after source changes.
The evidence addresses three targets: retained English and applicability, proposed in-
terpretation and formal expression, and generated Java behaviour. Exact bytes and
quotes support the first target’s identity. Model judgments and source comparisons
inform the second. Java replay checks the third within the exercised domain. No com-
pletion flag promotes one target into another. The full scope statement is retained at
docs/implementation/interpretation-round4/method-boundaries.md.
Rounds two and three contain live development work. The accepted round-three in-
vestigations retained 90 claim/candidate results for 23EC46 and 384 for 24EC16. Of the
latter, 224 are deterministic unavailable-program findings for seven unencodable pro-
posals. They are not model judgments about legal entailment. The other 160 received
source comparisons. All 474 pairs were accounted for, with both investigations unre-
solved and ineligible for release. Additional concerns and residual questions include
programming, source and factual gaps; their counts are not counts of independent legal
ambiguities.
Round four revalidated this evidence and used controlled or retained inputs, with no
new model calls. Its final regression record contains 503 tests, zero failures, errors or
skips, and two existing dependency warnings. The source-update exercise also ran a
1


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix A
separate Java host. Suite counts from successive phases overlap; summing them would
misdescribe the evidence.
A.2 Resolve an authority edition
The catalog at .localresources/sfc-authorities/b1/catalog.json links an issuing
authority to editions, provision locations and supported aliases. A citation in a candi-
date must resolve to a retained edition and exact text, not merely a similar title. The
catalog records publication and date evidence separately from the requested assess-
ment time. The accepted exercise covered four oﬀicial documents and six locator/date
resolutions, including the September 2023 and January 2026 Code editions.
The FAQ’s title and its later answer updates require special care. The retained page
is not an independently archived 2010 edition. Its historical applicability remains con-
ditional, and remote statutory definitions remain unacquired. The extraction checks
compare two text extractions and preserve disagreement or image warnings. OCR is
not implemented. Matching extraction results cannot establish that a scanned qualifi-
cation has been read.
An assurance source manifest may name authority_registry, example_registry and
example_scope; relative paths resolve against that manifest. The scope states issuer,
jurisdiction and issue IDs. The public example examples/interpretation-assurance/
authority-and-examples.json uses the retained catalog and example registry. It is a
development input, not an institution’s approved source register.
A.3 Compose separate controls
The component specification binds the source packet, inventoried claims and complete
final candidate set. Each component states its selected claims, alternative candidate
IDs, output meaning and assignment basis. The caller must justify why the members
are rival readings of one control, or separate controls that belong together. The tool
does not infer that legal grouping from successful compilation.
The command’s required arguments are:
.venv/bin/python -m legalmath.cli assurance-compose \
--investigation INVESTIGATION_DIRECTORY \
--spec COMPONENT_SPECIFICATION.json \
--jdk JDK_DIRECTORY --out NEW_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY
These capitalized arguments stand for operator-supplied paths. Use a fresh output di-
rectory. A retained real-input specification is artifacts/interpretation/round4/B2a/
attempt-01/composition/23ec46-spec.json; its identities belong to the referenced
historical investigation and cannot be reused after changing the source or candidate.
The output includes bundles, generated Java, JARs, cases, conformance results and a
2


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix A
manifest. Alternative selections form separate packages. Within each package, rules
and facts use component namespaces so unrelated meanings cannot collide. Each result
retains its source claims, modality, scope, exceptions, timing and upstream uncertainty.
Missing claims, unsupported expressions, unassigned candidates and combinations de-
ferred by the work limit remain explicitly incomplete. The package is a draft.
Seven builds were exercised: two controlled two-component selections and five re-
tained gift-control alternatives. True, false, unknown, conflict and out-of-scope results
were covered. These are not seven whole-circular implementations; complete coverage
of 23EC46 and 24EC16 remains unproved.
A.4 Run a case that distinguishes readings
The question procedure begins with a source-bound candidate comparison and its fac-
tual witness. The record includes the source packet, candidate set, assessment time,
base candidate, subject, output convention, assumptions and source quotes. Before re-
play, the implementation checks subject and output compatibility and constructs the
declared fact correspondence. The original candidate programs then run in Python and
Java on the corresponding snapshots.
The partition record retains accepted replays, excluded candidates and reasons, work
consumed and separated pairs. Unit-weight scores count executed pairs with different
projected results. They are scheduling observations, not legal probabilities. Resource-
deferred work cannot be labelled complete; unsupported programs and incompatible
facts cannot earn a score. Source-inventory omission checks retain priority even if every
comparable output agrees.
The controlled gift/discount case separated one pair and reached the repair sched-
uler. The retained 23EC46 comparison had incompatible fact bindings; 24EC16 had
no checked pair. Both reported NO_CHECKED_DISTINCTIONS. This means no checked
distinction was available, not that all possible readings agreed. Conditional derived
comparisons remain a separate facility. The implemented partition and verifier are in
src/legalmath/interpretation/assurance/questions.py; retained execution is in-
dexed by docs/implementation/interpretation-round4/b2b-result.md.
A.5 Use an oﬀicial example without inventing authority
The register at .localresources/sfc-examples/b3/registry.json binds each example
to the authority catalog, exact source quotation, issuer, edition, proposed factors and
declared outcome. The current issue is paragraph.3.11.applicability. It concerns
whether the paragraph applies, not an unconditional prohibition after exceptions.
Two proposed branches of FAQ Question 1 produced twenty conditional analogy and
distinction moves on five candidates. They share one source family. Six questions
remained, including historical applicability and whether the selected factors were
3


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix A
legally material.
The factorization is a developer proposal that requires review;
genuine quoted words do not make it exhaustive.
A generated example outside the register remains an unregistered hypothetical pro-
posal. A quotation cannot authenticate an invented court, case identity or holding. This
implementation has no court-case corpus, general judicial-ratio extractor or procedure
for determining binding priority. Source or registry changes invalidate dependent anal-
ysis instead of silently retaining its former applicability.
A.6 Present proposals and preserve partial checks
Present candidate analysis through candidate-presentation.json.
An entry with
WITHHELD_CORRUPT_PROSE has a null presentation and points to prose-quality.json
and the original candidate.
Raw proposals, compiled programs and their source
checks remain retained. An entry with NO_PATTERN_DETECTED passes only the imple-
mented pattern diagnostic. It has no certificate of natural language coherence or legal
correctness.
The detector identified five defects in the actual retained 24EC16 proposal: placeholder
subject and statement fields, self-repair chatter, and output instructions embedded in
questions. Exact authentic quotations, ordinary uncertainty and non-English text are
preserved by the checked negative cases. The detector’s coverage is deliberately nar-
row. Editing the proposal would require a successor candidate and renewed checks;
the presentation mechanism does not silently rewrite its meaning.
Fidelity results are checked for exact claim/candidate pairs, source quotations and rep-
resentation quotations. The historical 23EC46 response contained 33 rows where 32
were required; the validator identified the extra pair, and the retained correction vali-
dated all 32. That was revalidation of an existing correction, not a new live repair.
The per-response schema permits at most 1,000 checks and 30 concerns. The aggregate
profile bounds an investigation at 4,096 pairs, 1,080 concerns and 2,097,152 bytes; its per-
call pair default is 32 with a maximum of 64. These are engineering capacity choices.
Admission considers cached and unsupported readings as well as pending model work.
It can conservatively refuse work that might have returned shorter responses.
A completed matrix is retained in complete.json.
Interrupted aggregation keeps
partial.json and the validated parts; an oversized cached part remains separately
available.
Repeated concerns are retained even when a separate presentation list
deduplicates residual questions. A later failure cannot erase earlier rows or turn a
partial result into a clean interpretation.
The full profile and record names are in
docs/implementation/interpretation-round4/operator-guide.md.
4


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix A
A.7 Freeze and execute a comparison
The implemented adapters are
single-reader,
isolated-readers,
search and
assurance.
Freeze the source, assessment time, case-family assignments, reference
outcomes and resource ceilings through legalmath . interpretation . assurance .
evaluation.freeze before dispatch. The hidden scoring references are unavailable
to the methods. Missing answers and abstention are reported alongside unsafe and
useful accepted answers. The unit of uncertainty is a paired source-family average, as
derived in Section 9.8.1 of the monograph.
A replay invocation has this form:
.venv/bin/python -m legalmath.cli assurance-evaluate \
--frozen FROZEN_STUDY.json --out NEW_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY \
--jdk JDK_DIRECTORY --replay-responses RESPONSES.json
For
authorized
live
work,
the
provider
arguments
are
instead
--allowance
LEDGER.json --total-calls AUTHORIZED_CEILING. The command checks the com-
plete reservation before dispatch. Supplying the flag does not increase the authorized
ledger ceiling.
The round-four fixture reserved eight calls per method for two cases, or 64 calls. At that
checkpoint only 22 of the original 100 remained. Consequently no live comparison was
run. The eight scripted jobs tested actual adapters, hidden finite-scenario scoring and
adverse outcomes. Their one development family supplied no informative statistical
separation and no estimate of English error or reviewer savings. Additional calls alone
would not make those cases a held-out sample.
Subsequent work on references and source families is recorded separately in docs/
implementation / interpretation - round5 / execution - report . md. Those reference
preparations and new-source attempts form a separate continuation. Historical call bal-
ances above must not be copied into a new run; use the actual ledger and that run’s re-
viewed study. A complete effectiveness study still needs defensible outcome evidence
and a justified sampling and precision design. Internal qualified reviewers or explicit
oﬀicial outcomes can support suitable tasks; there is no automatic external-consultancy
requirement.
A.8 Package Java and revisit source changes
The package builder retains the draft rule bundle, policy source, JAR, host caller, source
commitments, conformance cases and manifest. A separate Java process calls the gen-
erated public API and receives the full typed result. Unknown or conflict must not be
reduced to a Boolean authorization. The local exercise uses draft mode and supplies
no institution release identity.
The scheduler wraps the fixed assurance monitor with bounded visits and process time-
outs. Its command accepts:
5


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix A
.venv/bin/python -m legalmath.cli assurance-schedule \
--config REGISTRY.json --resource-root RESOURCE_DIRECTORY \
--out NEW_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY --jdk JDK_DIRECTORY \
--at ASSESSMENT_TIME --settings SETTINGS.json \
--replay-responses RESPONSES.json \
--ticks 1 --interval-seconds 60 --tick-timeout-seconds 600
The numbers shown illustrate a bounded replay invocation, not a recommended bank
cadence. The default is one visit. The assessment time stays fixed during an invocation;
the institution scheduler must supply the intended assessment time for subsequent in-
vocations. Authorized live provider arguments use the same allowance and total-call
pair as evaluation.
Before dispatch, the wrapper copies source, registry, settings and replay bytes into the
output record and binds their identities. Editing an input file while a visit runs cannot
change its frozen inputs. Failed or uncertain work consumes an attempt and remains
visible. Nested failure or unresolved meaning produces an attention state even when
the outer process exits successfully.
The final integration repair prevents an unperformed example query, a resource-
deferred partition or limited argument analysis from being cached as fully executed.
Completed but unresolved interpretation remains unresolved on unchanged visits. Re-
tries are bounded, and corrupted cached evidence is rejected. The status distinguishes
what ran from what was established.
The accepted update exercise launched three separate Java host processes. Adding a fee-
discount exception changed the selected restriction from true to false on the controlled
facts. An unaffected control and the earlier package were preserved. Corrupted pack-
ages, uncertain callbacks, missed cadence and retry exhaustion were also exercised. No
actual regulatory amendment was independently interpreted in this demonstration.
For institution staging, the bank must supply its host and JDK, service identity, control
register and fact bindings, operations-owned scheduler, update cadence and release
roles. The local command installs no service and activates no bank policy. Confiden-
tiality, authenticated release, audit integrity and concurrent host transactions require
evidence from that environment.
6


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix A
A.9 Find the retained evidence
The acceptance state is in artifacts/interpretation/round4/state.json. Each ac-
cepted phase points to an immutable attempt directory and its run-manifest.json; in-
spect the manifest for exact commands, inputs, logs and output identities. The compact
index below explains what each record establishes.
B0: proposal and matrix integrity
Actual corrupt prose and the extra historical response pair, plus capacity and partial-
result retention. See docs/implementation/interpretation-round4/execution-
report.md.
B1: source editions
Four documents and six locator/date resolutions, with missing definitions and his-
torical uncertainty retained. See docs/implementation/interpretation-round4/
b1-result.md.
B2a and B2b: composition and distinguishing cases
Seven Java builds and the controlled executed partition, with no comparable witness
claimed for either retained circular. See the corresponding result notes in docs/
implementation/interpretation-round4/.
B3 and B4: examples and evaluation
One oﬀicial-example family and eight scripted comparison jobs. These establish
conditional argument construction and evaluation mechanics. Their result notes
state the remaining semantic and empirical limits.
B5 and B6: integration and completion
Local Java-host update and final status/input-retention repairs. The final suite is
artifacts/interpretation/round4/B6/attempt-01/tests.xml; its adjacent mani-
fest binds the 503-test acceptance and operations exercise.
The preceding live development is documented in the round-two and round-three ex-
ecution reports under docs/implementation/. These records explain how proposals
and source judgments were obtained; round-four replay does not turn them into fresh
independent observations. The two retained circulars remain unresolved. No method
ranking, population interpretation accuracy or reduction in review cost is established
by this evidence index.
7


Appendix B
Technical implementation record
The main chapters use a small number of examples to teach the decisions. This ap-
pendix preserves the exhaustive mappings that an implementation or audit may need
to look up. The tables are reference material; they are not intended to carry the argu-
ment without the surrounding explanations in Chapter 2.
B.1 Complete SPI provision inventory
Table B.1: Disposition of the complete circular for the worked
profile. Subparagraphs within each stated range remain part
of that row.
Source
Substantive instruction
Treatment in the worked change
Main text;
Annex 1
opening and
footnote 1
Introduce streamlining, retain
conduct and risk controls, and
import definitions and suitability
requirements.
Record authority, perimeter and
dependencies. The Java result covers
selected conditions only; the bank
retains its wider control chain.
1–2
Individual criteria at the relevant
date; separate investment-holding
corporation route.
Individual PI assessment is an input.
A corporate client returns outside
profile; ownership and
qualifying-owner aggregation
require a separate rule family.
3.1(a)–(b)
Inclusive alternative wealth
thresholds and currency
equivalents.
Execute exact HK-cent comparisons
joined by OR. Foreign currency
requires an adopted conversion
mapping before evaluation.
3.2(a)–(d),
3.3,
3.4(a)(i)–
(iii), (b)
Portfolio and asset/liability
attribution; residence exclusion;
written or equal joint shares under
the stated circumstances.
Reviewed normalization produces
portfolio and net assets. A missing
agreement is unresolved evidence,
not established absence. Preserve
each ownership calculation.
4.1(a)–(d),
5.1
Reasonable sophistication
assessment, alternative supporting
routes and non-conservative
objectives.
Execute the alternative routes and
require the dated assessment and
objectives. Do not substitute the
representative’s attributes.
8


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix B
Source
Substantive instruction
Treatment in the worked change
6, 7.1–7.3
Restrict transactions to selected
categories and threshold; define
categories, provide information,
and apply category qualification.
Require selected category, resolved
category explanations and
information. Count same-category
transactions or establish another
qualification route.
8.1–8.2
Client specifies a threshold
appropriate to circumstances;
bank retains the setting and
rationale.
Accept an agreed, reviewed absolute
HKD threshold and rationale. A
percentage-of-AUM arrangement
needs a versioned conversion to the
same input.
8.3(a)
Monitor gross exposure on
execution.
Compare projected exposure
including the candidate transaction
with the agreed limit; host must
reserve exposure atomically before
using the decision.
8.3(b)
Alternative monitoring for
designated accounts and new
funds.
Explicitly outside profile.
Implement its own account,
transferred-position and top-up
events before enabling it.
Qualification
and category
Exposure and
transaction relief
Records, consent and
continuing review
Figure B.1: The provision inventory preserves responsibilities beyond the financial test.
Source
Substantive instruction
Treatment in the worked change
8.4–8.5
Detect outsize or material
transactions and warn; review
threshold compliance annually
and alert if exceeded.
Require transaction assessment and
conditional warning. Schedule
review/alert tasks; a reviewed
composite reports annual controls
current.
9; 10.1–10.4
Define solicited-transaction relief,
with explanation exceptions and
offering documents retained.
Execute the solicited profile. The
result identifies applicable relief; it
does not disable every suitability or
disclosure control.
11.1–11.5;
footnotes 2–4
Different relief for unsolicited
complex-product transactions,
including document alternatives
and warning arrangements.
Outside profile. Preserve the distinct
document/evidence branches, bond
information alternatives and
annual-warning requirement for a
later implementation.
9


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix B
Source
Substantive instruction
Treatment in the worked change
12.1–12.3
Reasonable satisfaction, written
assessment and correspondence
recording category and threshold
choices.
Dated assessments and document
references feed named facts; records
remain independently inspectable.
13.1(a)–(d),
13.2
Prior written agreement and
explanation of consequences,
categories, threshold and
withdrawal/amendment rights.
A checklist-backed acknowledgment
input plus a replayed consent state.
Every item in the checklist must be
evidenced; a signature alone is
insuﬀicient.
14.1–14.2
Annual continued-
qualification/agreement review
and written reminders covering
consequences, categories,
threshold, breaches and rights.
Ongoing tasks and reviewed status.
Suspending streamlining when
review is overdue is a proposed
additional bank restriction.
Annex 2,
FAQ 1
Appropriate reliance on
disclosures after reasonable KYC
efforts; clarify inconsistency.
Define admissible evidence and
escalation; do not invent a blanket
requirement for independent
third-party confirmation.
FAQ 2
Client and power-of-attorney
distinctions.
Attribute qualifications to the client.
Apply the FAQ to transaction-history
evidence without copying the
attorney’s sophistication.
FAQs 3–4,
including
notes
Category design, diﬀicult product
distinctions and category
information.
Bank-owned category taxonomy,
versioned mappings and
information checklist; uncertain
mapping requests review.
FAQ 5
Threshold should reflect the
client’s circumstances; bank-held
AUM may be a limited part of
wealth.
Recorded client circumstances and
threshold rationale. No universal
percentage is invented.
FAQ 6
Explain both monitoring
approaches, including
designated-account transfers,
appreciation and new funds.
Use execution monitoring here.
Keep alternative-account rules
visible; do not infer forced
unwinding merely from exceeding
its threshold.
FAQ 7
Gross exposure includes leverage.
Feed leverage-inclusive projected
exposure to the execution
comparison.
B.2 Detailed inputs for the demonstrated Java profile
10


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix B
Table B.3: Input contracts for the demonstrated Java profile.
A known value always has evidence, a validity interval and
a recording time.
Input or group
Meaning and intended owner
Profile flags
profile_individual, profile_solicited,
profile_execution_monitoring: the host’s classified
client, activity and monitoring mode. False selects an
unsupported profile; unknown requests review.
individual_pi
Compliance assessment under the adopted Professional
Investor Rules and Code definitions, for this legal client
and date. It is distinct from merely being an individual.
portfolio;
net_assets_ex_home
Valuation/operations supplies exact HK cents after
reviewed ownership, liabilities, residence and currency
treatment. Preserve the calculation inputs and source
evidence.
Qualification fields
relevant_degree, professional_qualification,
relevant_year_of_work; alternatively
category_transactions_3y. Client-level evidence is
mapped to the selected category and relevant period.
Assessment fields
reasonable_sophistication_assessment,
non_conservative_objectives,
written_assessment_retained.
Compliance/relationship management supplies the
assessment and records; missing review is unknown.
Category fields
category_selected, category_information_delivered,
category_explanation_resolved. Client choice and
delivery evidence must match the transaction’s
versioned category.
Reviewed
client attributes
Transaction and
exposure evidence
Consent and com-
pleted actions
Figure B.2: The input table joins facts supplied by different operational owners.
Input or group
Meaning and intended owner
Acknowledgment and
consent
prior_written_acknowledgment_complete covers every
required item in 13.1–13.2; active_consent comes from
the client/category consent history. Document
completeness and present consent are different facts.
11


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix B
Input or group
Meaning and intended owner
Threshold and exposure
streamlining_threshold, projected_gross_exposure
are HK cents; threshold_rationale_retained is an
assessment/record check. Order management supplies a
consistent exposure snapshot including leverage.
annual_review_current
Reviewed composite covering continued
qualification/agreement, threshold review, required
reminders and breach alerts. The demo consumes this
status; it does not calculate annual deadlines or send
reminders.
Product information
current_offering_documents_delivered,
explanation_requested_or_material_query,
explanation_delivered. Delivery/interaction records
determine whether the remaining request has been
answered.
Transaction warnings
transaction_materiality_assessed,
outsize_or_material_transaction,
material_warning_delivered. The assessment is
required; a warning is required if the assessment says so.
B.3 Full distinguishing-case table
Table B.5: Distinguishing cases derived from the running in-
terpretation. Other inputs remain as in the successful syn-
thetic case unless stated.
Changed fact
Result
Why it changes the operational
response
Portfolio HK$39,999,999.99; net
assets HK$75m
Standard process
Both financial alternatives are
refuted.
Portfolio HK$35m; net assets
HK$90m
Conditions met
The alternative net-asset route
suﬀices.
Portfolio missing; net assets
HK$90m
Conditions met
Missing portfolio is reported,
but does not block the
established alternative.
Portfolio missing; net assets
HK$70m
Review required
Portfolio evidence can change
the answer. It is a blocking
input.
Conservative objectives
Standard process
Wealth does not overcome
paragraph 5.1.
Four category transactions; no
other qualifying route
Standard process
The countable route is not
established.
Chosen category does not match
Standard process
General SPI attributes do not
extend the selected categories.
12


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix B
Changed fact
Result
Why it changes the operational
response
Gross exposure HK$10,000,000.01
Standard process
The execution-monitoring
condition is exceeded.
Written acknowledgment
incomplete, or consent withdrawn
Standard process
Prior documentation and
current consent are both
required.
Client requests explanation; no
answer recorded
Standard process
Paragraph 10.3 retains the
requested explanation.
Material transaction; no warning
delivered
Standard process
The applicable paragraph 8.4
warning remains outstanding.
Two inconsistent portfolio records
Review required
An evidence conflict is not
resolved by choosing the more
convenient amount.
Designated-account monitoring
selected
Outside profile
Its different paragraph
8.3(b)/FAQ 6 logic has not
been executed by this library.
13


Appendix C
Historical implementation and design
record
This appendix preserves the original workbench and the 23 September scripted inter-
pretation increment, together with their design proposals. Its task names, API sketches
and future-tense passages belong to those checkpoints. For the implemented source
generation, search, assurance, composition and monitoring through 24 September, be-
gin with Appendix A. Empirical effectiveness and institution acceptance remain sepa-
rate requirements.
C.1 The shared workbench and its users
LegalMath should be a regulatory specification workbench. Its primary users are the
compliance oﬀicer interpreting a change, the product or operations owner deciding
how it affects the business, and the engineer implementing the resulting control. An
auditor or independent reviewer should be able to reconstruct the same decision later.
The product succeeds when those people can inspect one maintained interpretation
through views suited to their work.
The first local release was designed around a narrow end-to-end task: take a selected
public circular and its dependencies, prepare proposed rules, resolve or retain inter-
pretation questions, evaluate synthetic cases, and export a versioned change package
containing generated Java source, a compiled JAR and its evidence. That local path is
now implemented with public sources and synthetic identities. Integration into bank
systems still follows the bank’s ordinary change process.
Compliance interprets
Engineering
implements
Operations acts and
retains evidence
Figure C.1: The workbench gives different participants views of the same reviewed
meaning.
14


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
C.2 What a reviewer should see
Opening the SPI financial condition should display the source passage and its annex
context beside a controlled explanation: the portfolio route or the net-asset route can
satisfy this particular condition. Definitions should be available in place, especially
ownership attribution and exclusion of the primary residence. The same screen should
show the boundary cases, missing evidence and where the condition is used in the
larger SPI assessment.
The reviewer can change an interpretation, ask for a distinguishing example, or record
a question for the policy owner. If two candidate readings differ only at the threshold,
the workbench should produce that boundary case. If they differ because one applies
to a representative and another to the client, the example should name the roles. The
user should not need to understand a solver formula to see why the choice matters.
The engineer views the corresponding types, data mappings, executable dependency
graph and tests. The operations owner views required actions, responsible teams, tim-
ing and evidence of completion. A diagram or decision table is generated from the
same adopted rules. Maintaining a separate hand-edited flowchart would create an-
other translation boundary and another version to reconcile.
Preserved sources
and dependencies
Proposed in-
terpretation
and unresolved
questions
Reviewed typed rules
and examples
Reference evaluator
and generated Java
Tests, counterexamples
and scoped proofs
Decision explanations
and amend-
ment history
Figure C.2: The proposed workbench. Counterexamples return to interpretation review.
A proof result remains attached to the exact rules, assumptions and software version it
checks.
C.3 The execution architecture and its deliberate limits
The authoring runtime is a Python 3.11 reference interpreter, with JSON Schema and
semantic validation, SQLite storage, content-addressed source files and a local FastAPI
service. A server-rendered interface presents source, rule and case together. The inter-
preter walks a validated syntax tree; it does not execute model-generated Python. Sets,
quantifiers, general recursion, arbitrary code, currency conversion and unbounded tem-
poral formulas are outside RuleIR 0.1. An external, evidenced normalizer can supply a
reviewed count or HKD value.
These restrictions keep common questions tractable and make the trusted code small
enough to inspect. They also provide a natural place to evaluate the literature: Catala
15


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
for the decision fragment, DMN as a possible Java integration comparison, and a
Stipula-inspired state model for a bounded workflow. The project should not integrate
all candidate engines before demonstrating one complete use case.
Validate the re-
stricted expression
Run its de-
fined semantics
Reject unsup-
ported constructs
Figure C.3: A bounded language makes its supported behavior inspectable.
A reference interpreter implements the written execution semantics. A schema val-
idator checks structure; a semantic validator checks expression types, resolved depen-
dencies, source links and explicit exception relationships; a scenario runner evaluates
reviewed examples. A solver adapter then searches for conflicts, unreachable branches
and semantic differences. Generated code should come from a deterministic compiler
for the supported fragment. At transaction time, evaluation uses an approved rule ver-
sion and a recorded fact snapshot; language-model generation belongs to authoring
and review.
An implementation adapter is accepted only after its treatment of missing values, nu-
meric boundaries, priority, dates and obligations agrees with the reference semantics
on the required checks. DMN’s hit-policy choices and Rego’s undefined results make
this comparison substantive (Object Management Group, 2024; Open Policy Agent con-
tributors, 2026). A backend that cannot express a required distinction should report
that limitation instead of approximating it silently.
C.3.1 Source identity, review and storage
The source store preserves original bytes and an exact text derivative. The raw docu-
ment and derivative each have a SHA-256 digest. A source span records the deriva-
tive hash, page, half-open character offsets and a hash of the quoted text. Extraction
changes create a new derivative; they do not silently move an approved span. A re-
viewer can open the original page beside the extracted passage. Scanned or poorly
extracted clauses require visual confirmation before release.
The source register distinguishes circulars, annexes, FAQs, codes, bank policy and inter-
pretation. Dependency rows record references, definitions, amendments and replace-
ments; unresolved targets remain explicit. Publication date does not automatically es-
tablish effectiveness. Applicability records identify legal entity, regulated role, activity,
product, client class and jurisdiction. A product-provider requirement cannot enter the
bank’s distributor rules merely because its title mentions a product the bank sells.
16


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Retain original
source bytes
Bind interpreta-
tion to exact spans
Approve a partic-
ular bundle hash
Figure C.4: Source identity and review identity must remain connected.
The bundle contains definitions, expressions, spans and interpretations. Its canoni-
cal JSON hash identifies the entire immutable revision. Review decisions live outside
those bytes and approve that exact hash. The lifecycle is draft, in review, approved,
released and retired; rejection returns a revision to draft, while an edit creates a new
draft hash. Release requires distinct compliance and engineering reviewers, resolved
blocking questions and dependencies, a supported effective interval and passing evi-
dence for that hash. The author cannot approve their own revision under the proposed
prototype policy.
SQLite transactions enforce review revisions and idempotency. A stale review update
is rejected rather than overwriting another review. Content-addressed blobs are writ-
ten before their database references; a missing referenced blob is an integrity error. Au-
dit rows record accepted transitions. Hashes detect accidental corruption but do not
make a database tamper-proof against an administrator able to rewrite both records
and hashes. Enterprise identity, signed retention and access controls belong to the later
bank deployment.
C.4 The original work packages and their execution
The original W packages specified the route from a document-only contract to a working
system. Their requirements are retained because they explain what the implementation
must preserve. The next section records their completed T-task realization and identi-
fies the optional research and human-evaluation work that remains. The twelve-week
allocation was a planning assumption, not measured development effort or evidence
of bank readiness.
The implementation sequence below separates the delivered Java demonstration from
the complete product modules. Its operational entry point is docs/implementation/
START-HERE.md, with corresponding source paths and commands in work-packages.md.
The manuscript supplies the meanings, interfaces and acceptance conditions; these files
are the implementation copies. W00 establishes an isolated Python 3.11 environment
and locks actual dependency versions. It does not modify the environments of the three
adjacent MCP projects. The proposed stack is Python’s exact integer/date/hash/SQLite
facilities, JSON Schema, Pydantic/FastAPI, Poppler or a ResearchAssistant extraction
adapter, Jinja2 for the review pages, and optional Z3 for authoring. Java 17, a deter-
ministic source emitter and a compiled conformance harness are required for delivery.
Package versions are resolved and recorded during bootstrap; the current local MVP
has integrated and locked its selected dependencies. The retained W-package descrip-
tions below explain the original work division.
17


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
The following command works on the delivered specification pack now:
python3 scripts/check_spec_pack.py
It validates schemas, fixture structure, selected static constraints, the source anchor and
the SQLite definition. After W03 implements the evaluator, the same checker has an
explicit runtime mode:
.venv/bin/python scripts/check_spec_pack.py \
--runtime legalmath.conformance:evaluate_case
The second command became an executed check in the accepted MVP: all 35 decision
cases passed. Its event-and-release flag describes only this particular harness; sepa-
rate tests and the complete walkthrough execute those components. The narrower SPI-
Demo1 command in Section E.1 remains a separate reproduction route. Neither result
establishes automatic legal translation.
Reference semantics
Java and re-
view workflow
Evaluation and
integration
Figure C.5: The original work packages explain the order of engineering dependencies.
Table C.1: Implementation packages and their completion
evidence. Detailed files, functions, commands and repair
conditions are in the accompanying backlog.
Package
Work and demonstrable result
Evidence needed to proceed
W00
Package, locked environment,
canonical JSON, immutable blobs and
database migration.
Same content hashes across
processes; duplicate keys/floats
rejected; interrupted writes leave
no broken references.
W01
Import 23EC35 and annexes; preserve
derivatives, spans and dependencies.
Reproduce the paragraph 3.1
anchor; changed bytes and
broken attachments are detected.
W02
Typed RuleIR, references, graph
validation and dated evidence
normalization.
Reject
malformed/type-invalid/cyclic
rules; explain missing, stale and
conflicting facts.
W03
Pure evaluator and deterministic trace.
First financial-condition demonstration.
Execute 35 decision fixtures; catch
boundary, OR, unknown and
conflict mutations.
W03J
Complete Java emitter, runtime
support, compiled conformance and
host boundary.
Full supported results agree with
the reference; mutations fail;
source and JAR builds reproduce;
a separate caller runs.
18


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Package
Work and demonstrable result
Evidence needed to proceed
W04
Exact-hash reviews, release guards,
Java package export and amendment
comparison.
Self-approval, stale reviews and
wrong-bundle or wrong-JAR
evidence fail; historic versions
replay.
W05
Consent, one duty profile, calendar
policies and complete-window
evidence.
Eight event fixtures plus ordering,
duplicate, leap-date and
late-correction tests.
W06
Local API and
source/rule/case/amendment screens.
Contract tests and a reviewer
walkthrough; unresolved
evidence remains visible.
W07
Restricted SMT encoding and
counterexample service.
Boundary counterexample
replays; empty domain and
unsupported constructs cannot
pass as equivalence.
W08
Paginated corpus tracking, clause
coverage and bounded model drafting.
Drafting cannot approve;
omissions scored against an
independent source inventory.
W09
Optional isolated ResearchAssistant,
MathDevMCP and DynareMCP
adapters.
Exact command/version/hash
evidence; structural checks never
mislabeled as proofs.
W10
Registered comparative pilot, error
analysis, cost and review-time study.
Source parity, independent
adjudication, uncertainty and a
scoped investment decision.
The reference interpreter comes before language-model drafting because it supplies a
stable target for evaluating the draft. That ordering also measures whether the shared
specification is useful even without generative assistance. The event model is intro-
duced only after the decision language is coherent, so diﬀiculties with consent histories
can be separated from errors in money comparisons or source extraction.
W00–W04, including W03J, receive a provisional four-week allocation; W05–W08
receive another four, with review, integration, rework and the pilot bringing
the allowance to twelve weeks.
The earlier three-week first-stage estimate did
not include a required Java backend.
This revised allocation remains a plan-
ning assumption, with scope reduction or a schedule extension if full operator
conformance takes longer.
Each package specifies files, function signatures, de-
pendent packages and tests.
Its acceptance condition concerns behavior, not
elapsed time.
For example,
W03 supplies
ir/evaluate.py and
ir/trace.py;
W04
supplies
review/lifecycle.py
and
review/amendment.py;
W07
supplies
analysis/z3_encode.py and analysis/compare.py.
The deployment interface is the generated Java library, checked against the reference
decision API. Catala, L4 and DMN are later adapter comparisons against the same fixed
cases, not prerequisites that leave the implementer waiting for a framework choice. A
Stipula–KeY experiment remains optional and bounded to one workflow property. If
its abstractions hide the relevant event behavior, report that result and continue the
19


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
useful reference implementation.
C.4.1 Release contents, extension tasks and acceptance
The W-package names below identify the original allocation of responsibilities. They
explain the acceptance obligations that drove the implemented T00–T22 tasks; they are
not an additional unfinished backlog. The execution account that follows maps those
obligations to the delivered workbench. The E tasks later in this chapter specify the
new ensemble work.
A production change package must contain the approved source and dependency reg-
ister, provision dispositions, rule bundle, reviewer records, supported profile and effec-
tive interval, generated Java source, runtime library, binary JAR, dependency/toolchain
manifest, data-mapping contract, tests and verification report. The report names the ex-
act JAR tested. The bank’s deployment process verifies these digests and authorization,
performs its security and change checks, then switches the active release atomically. A
signature can authenticate the release authority; a digest alone only identifies content.
Reviewed
source and rule
Tested Java package
Controlled re-
lease decision
Figure C.6: A release contains evidence of meaning, behavior and authority.
The implementation backlog adds a mandatory Java package, W03J, immediately
after the full reference evaluator. It owns the Java domain/API classes, one emitter
per RuleIR operator, result serialization, exact numeric/date behavior, compiled
conformance harness, JAR manifest and host adapter contract.
Its pass condition
is equivalence of the complete supported responses on the full conformance suite,
source-derived scenarios and distinguishing mutations, plus reproducible generation
and a separately compiled caller. A backend that accepts an operator but approximates
its meaning fails the package.
W04 must bind release evidence to both the rule bundle and the resulting JAR. W05
must extend the demonstration’s consent replay to the full event contract, including
obligation instances and the adopted calendar policy. W06 must show the source, in-
terpretation, test case and Java result together. W10 must include host concurrency,
idempotency, stale release and replay tests in its engineering checks, then separately
measure review effort and material errors in the pilot. This sequencing produces a Java
deliverable early while keeping legal adjudication and production authority explicit.
C.4.2 Distinguishing specification fixtures from executed evidence
The proposal now has a machine-readable companion to the business scenarios. Under
docs/specs/v0.1/fixtures/, 35 decision cases specify complete bundles, synthetic
20


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
snapshots, assessment times and expected result projections. Six deliberately invalid
variants exercise schema, reference, type and identifier failures. Eight event histories
cover withdrawal, regrant, timely performance, deadline equality, missing observations
and late performance. Four release cases distinguish valid approval from self-review,
open issues and stale evidence.
These sets serve different purposes. The 35 cases specify the selected language; the fif-
teen business scenarios above identify regulatory interpretation and operational ques-
tions, several of which remain beyond the first executable slice. An agent must not
claim that passing the language cases completes those business scenarios. For exam-
ple, a Boolean assessment input can represent a reviewer’s judgment about investment
objectives, but it does not automate that judgment. Likewise, ownership and category
definitions require their own reviewed normalization and end-to-end tests before re-
lease.
Fixture states ex-
pected behavior
Executed check
observes behavior
Legal review justifies
the expectation
Figure C.7: A fixture file alone is not a passing test or an adjudicated interpretation.
The original specification checker validates three initial JSON schemas,
the
35
decision
fixture
contracts,
six
negative
examples,
event-record
structure,
source/derivative/span hashes and the SQLite definitions.
Its static mode alone
does not execute the engines. The accepted MVP subsequently executed all 35 decision
cases in runtime mode and exercised event and release behavior through separate tests
and the complete walkthrough. The recorded acceptance also checked regeneration of
31 JSON contracts, including OpenAPI. Static fixture checks and those later execution
results remain different evidence.
The separate Java demonstration now supplies
narrower execution evidence: 32 SPI decisions and eleven consent histories agree with
the independently written reference; all three compiled mutations are detected; a fresh
rebuild produces an identical JAR; and a separately compiled host calls that JAR before
and after withdrawal. The exact commands, toolchain and source/binary hashes are
retained in its verification report.
Its ten rules and reviewed-input boundaries are
explained in Sections 2.2 and E.1. Independent legal adjudication, human usability
assessment and published-tool proof replay remain prospective.
C.5 The implemented authoring service and its current
boundary
The original service design below names the core responsibilities and transport con-
ventions. T00–T22 implemented a larger 22-path API; the retained generated OpenAPI
and the exact runtime closure resolve the original sketches. Reviewer identity is de-
rived from authentication, every mutation uses a caller-scoped idempotency key, and
21


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
the build–verification–release sequence is acyclic. The table is a design summary, not a
substitute for the current request models.
The API imports sources, creates and retrieves bundles, records reviews, releases ap-
proved hashes, evaluates snapshots, appends events, replays histories and compares
versions. The transport contract is summarized below; companion files preserve the
same field names for implementation. The central reference call is
evaluate(bundle, snapshot, rule_id, valid_at, known_at,
mode="draft")
-> EvaluationResult
The evaluation response includes the tagged outcome, exact value if any, reason codes,
missing and blocking inputs, trace, source/bundle/input hashes and engine version.
Production calls require a released exact hash; draft calls visibly retain draft mode. An
HTTP failure is different from a well-formed request whose assessment returns an error
or conflict.
The original authoring-service sketch assigns the following endpoint responsibilities.
Path parameters name immutable content identities; state-changing requests also carry
a caller-scoped idempotency key.
Repeating the same key and request returns the
stored response; reusing it with different content returns HTTP 409. Optimistic revi-
sions prevent two reviewers from overwriting each other’s changes.
Table C.2: Authoring-service contract. This service is sepa-
rate from the Java transaction library.
Method and path
Required request and returned result
POST /v1/sources/import
Oﬀicial URL or local blob, reference ID and media
type; returns source revision and derivative
hashes. Invalid content is 422; fetch failure is 502.
POST /v1/bundles
Complete typed bundle; returns immutable hash,
draft status and revision 1. Schema or type failure
is 422.
GET /v1/bundles/{hash}
Returns exact bundle, review state and issues;
unknown hash is 404.
POST
/v1/bundles/{hash}/review
Decision, comment and expected revision;
reviewer identity/role derived from
authentication; returns new state/revision. Stale
update is 409; invalid transition is 422.
POST
/v1/bundles/{hash}/release
Java-release-manifest hash, expected revision and
activation time; returns release record if all guards
pass. Missing approval or mismatched code
evidence is 422.
POST /v1/evaluations
Bundle hash, snapshot, rule ID, mode and both
times; returns the complete evaluation. A
nonreleased production bundle is 409.
GET /v1/evaluations/{hash}
Returns preserved request, result and source links;
unknown hash is 404.
22


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Method and path
Required request and returned result
POST
/v1/event-streams/{id}/events
Event, expected revision and ordering authority;
returns stored event/revision. An ID payload
mismatch or sequence collision is 409.
POST
/v1/event-streams/{id}/replay
Both times and profile version; returns immutable
consent/obligation state with evidence.
POST /v1/comparisons
Old/new bundle hashes, rule ID and declared
domain; returns a persisted job ID and later a
counterexample or a specifically bounded analysis
result.
GET /v1/changes/{old}/{new}
Returns changed definitions, rules, sources,
affected dependants and evidence that must be
regenerated.
Authenticated request
Validated state
transition
Durable response
and evidence
Figure C.8: The authoring API is separate from transaction-time Java execution.
The persistent relationships follow the questions the reviewer asks. A source revision
points to immutable raw and extracted blobs; an interpretation points to its spans and
unresolved issues; a bundle contains the interpreted rules; reviews and release records
point to that bundle hash. A snapshot identifies its subject and facts. An evaluation
points to the bundle, snapshot and both times. An event belongs to a stream and has an
immutable identifier and ordering evidence; replay results are separate records. Jobs,
idempotency records and audit events preserve asynchronous work and accepted state
transitions. The supplied SQL represents these relationships with foreign keys and
JSON payloads; a Java release manifest can be retained as an immutable blob referenced
from the release evidence. No mutable row is allowed to change the contents identified
by an old digest.
For content identity, sort JSON object keys by ASCII order, preserve array order and
string code points, use compact UTF-8 and hash the bytes with SHA-256. Reject du-
plicate keys, floating-point values, nonfinite values and unpaired Unicode surrogates.
JSON integer metadata is limited to the exactly portable range [−(253 −1), 253 −1]; do-
main integers and money use decimal strings. This is an explicitly specified local format,
not an assertion of conformance to a different canonical-JSON standard. A result hash
excludes itself and incidental timing/request identifiers. These rules let the Python au-
thoring service and Java library identify the same inputs and semantic output.
Longer solver or drafting calls use persisted jobs with explicit failed, cancelled and
timed-out states. They cannot alter approval records. Oﬀicial documents and model
output remain untrusted input: fetching restricts hosts and redirects, validates content
and limits resources; parsing never executes a document’s instructions. The initial ser-
vice binds to localhost and uses public sources and synthetic facts. This makes the
23


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
proposed behavior implementable before private data access or production integration
is considered.
C.6 What the 22 September local execution
established
The original work packages have now produced an engineering MVP. The retained
22 September 2026 acceptance contains 154 passing tests, execution of all 35 RuleIR
decision cases, and a complete 23EC35 review-to-Java walkthrough. Its authority is
LOCAL_SYNTHETIC. This means that named synthetic identities exercise the review con-
trols on public sources; it does not mean that the bank has accepted the legal interpre-
tations or deployed the code. The evidence below is the earlier recorded execution, not
a new test run performed while unifying this manuscript.
Three evidence sets must remain distinguishable.
SPI-Demo1 supplies 32 decision
examples and eleven consent histories for its narrower interface. The later workbench
implements the full specified decision language, attributed consent and the finite
achievement-duty profile, with review and release services. The second-circular exer-
cise then adds 22 named 23EC46 cases, 729 abstract inputs and four compiled mutants
while retaining its DRAFT status.
Combining the documents must not turn those
separate denominators into a count of independently adjudicated legal questions.
The workbench walkthrough imports 23EC35 and both annexes and checks all 51 pro-
vision dispositions. The selected business profile is an individual client in a solicited
transaction using execution monitoring under Annex 1 paragraph 8.3(a). Five circulars
remain in the retained pilot corpus, but the implemented SPI profile does not thereby
cover every provision in those circulars. Corporate clients, designated-account moni-
toring and the other explicit exclusions retain their own dispositions.
For the original candidate, 32 SPI example outcomes and eight attributed consent/duty
histories run through the exact generated candidate JAR. Separate synthetic author,
meaning-reviewer and engineering-reviewer identities then approve the exact manifest.
A separately compiled Java host invokes the exported library. A recorded withdrawal
changes the selected streamlining result from true to false. Thus the evidence crosses
the actual library boundary and includes an event that changes a later decision.
A synthetic amendment then raises a financial threshold by one cent. It is an engineer-
ing change example, not an SFC amendment. It receives a new bundle, build, verifica-
tion, coverage and scope review, approvals and release. Its October test interval follows
the original September interval. Exporting and restoring the public/synthetic history
reproduces the original September decision exactly, including its original evidence and
result identity. A successful current evaluation alone would not have established that
property.
24


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Original Septem-
ber decision
Synthetic one-
cent amendment
Historical Septem-
ber replay
Figure C.9: The retained execution checks change and historical reconstruction.
The released original class is hk.legalmath.Policy_87e4416d72408979a341. Its full con-
tent identities are retained here so that the two releases can be distinguished without a
mutable filename:
Listing C.1: SHA-256 identities of the retained local walkthrough.
Original bundle:
87e4416d72408979a341bdb80581201bbd7306be4bb1d81157693f641025ec4e
Original JAR:
6b069b605a331480d618561b61e26c133f08f657813c779bc8c374a2aea62e51
Synthetic amended JAR:
fb0d1c41a98e8f072834998fbd1c70447a9b54e15198c1d46f683524b5166df2
The different binary identities are evidence that the release changed; their meaning
comes from the corresponding bundle and verification records.
C.6.1 From the original packages to completed engineering tasks
The W packages describe the design responsibilities. The more detailed T tasks record
their implementation and acceptance. Table C.3 retains every core task and the two
distinct outstanding tasks. Its evidence statements refer to the retained full-suite run;
they do not assert that every listed command was separately rerun.
Table C.3: The completed local workbench and its remaining
research tasks.
Task
Behavior established by the retained engineering evidence
T00
Closed boundary, temporal, identity, event-attribution and release-sequence
gaps; fixed schemas and adversarial expectations A01–A16.
T01
Isolated Python 3.11 package, pinned dependencies, CLI and a clean
non-editable installation.
T02
Canonical JSON, atomic content-addressed blobs, WAL database, migrations,
foreign keys, transactional idempotency/audit and corruption checks.
T03
Source and annex import, raw/text/page/offset verification, extractor identity
and original-document display.
T04
Provision dispositions, definition dependencies, applicability dimensions and
authenticated meaning review; missing coverage or dependencies blocks release.
T05
Full AST validation, fixed diagnostics, duplicate/reference/type/cycle rejection
and bounded expanded call depth.
T06
Dated records, interval-local supersession, late corrections, evidence merging
and explicit unknown/conflicting evidence.
25


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Task
Behavior established by the retained engineering evidence
T07
All specified RuleIR operators, scope/default/unknown/conflict semantics and
all 35 original decision cases.
T08
Independent result/trace checks, including altered links, hashes, order and
duplicate rejection, with retained boundary expectations.
T09
Complete specified Java decision semantics, verification through the actual
generated class, 32 migrated SPI cases, non-Boolean results and three compiled
mutants.
T10
Clean deterministic Java 17 builds, exact-binary evidence and a separate caller
requiring no Python or model service.
Validate and eval-
uate typed rules
Build and check Java
Review, release
and retain history
Figure C.10: The completed tasks connect semantics to a controlled release.
Task
Behavior established by the retained engineering evidence
T11
Registry roles, author/reviewer separation, stale-revision rejection,
exact-manifest approvals, source/coverage checks and atomic audit.
T12
Legal-interval and operational-time release selection, overlap/retirement
rejection, exact-byte export and history restoration.
T13
Attributed event persistence, ordering, completeness, consent generations, duty
deadlines, late evidence and explicit leap-day policies.
T14
Complete Python/Java event-result agreement, release verification of the event
component and consent-to-decision composition.
T15
Synthetic versioned host with simultaneous reservation, consent/release
changes, bounded retries and idempotent orders. Its storage remains in process.
T16
API, local identity, stable errors, persistence, bounded background jobs,
cancellation, restart and launch-failure handling.
T17
Source/rule/case/amendment screens and a local API console; Chromium,
keyboard, HKD formatting and injection checks.
T18
Bounded comparison with explicit knownness; strict-boundary and OR–AND
witnesses replay in both engines; empty-domain, unsupported and timeout
outcomes remain distinct.
T19
Restricted discovery, hash-bound pilot manifest, attachment changes,
replacement metadata and unsafe-network rejection.
T20
Deterministic drafting provider, exact citations, bounded repair and
timeout/manual-review outcomes, with no tool or approval authority.
T21
Definition/source/fact/rule impact, fresh exact-version approvals, historical
decisions and unchanged opening versions for existing duties.
T22
Complete original/amended review-to-Java walkthrough, external host,
export/restore, full suite, fresh installation and browser checks.
T23
Optional research adapters: not run as part of core acceptance. Real adapter
invocation, licensing review and proof-search evaluation remain separate work.
26


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Task
Behavior established by the retained engineering evidence
T24
Independent human/model comparative pilot: pending. Requires participants,
adjudicated tasks and a registered protocol; no effectiveness result exists.
The mapping makes the old backlog usable without creating duplicate work. W00 cor-
responds to T01–T02; W01 to T03 and the source-import part of T19; W02 to T05–T06;
W03 to T07–T08; and W03J to T09–T10. W04’s coverage, review, release and amend-
ment responsibilities appear in T04, T11–T12 and T21. W05 becomes T13–T14; W06
becomes T16–T17; W07 becomes T18. W08’s inventory, discovery and drafting work
appears in T04 and T19–T20. W09 remains the optional T23 work. The engineering
part of W10 is exercised by T15 and T22, while its comparative human/model claim re-
mains T24. This last split prevents completed software testing from becoming a claim
of measured reduction in compliance errors.
The package layout also became concrete during execution. The Java runtime is under
src/legalmath/java/runtime so an installed package can generate a standalone JAR.
Export and history restoration are implemented in src/legalmath/review/releases.
py and src/legalmath/storage/archive.py. The synthetic transaction host is pack-
aged with the Java runtime. These path choices replace the earlier proposed tree while
retaining its acceptance obligations.
C.6.2 Reproducing the whole selected change
The implementation can be exercised without a live drafting model. From a prepared
checkout with the locked environment and retained JDK, the following command cre-
ates a fresh, isolated demonstration. Its output directory must be empty; it must not
overwrite an accepted evidence directory.
Listing C.2: Reproduce the complete local workbench scenario in a new directory.
.venv/bin/legalmath demo --repository . \
--workdir /tmp/legalmath-unified-demo-new \
--jdk .localresources/java-toolchain/jdk-17.0.20.1+1
This command imports the retained sources, checks the selected provision disposi-
tions, builds and verifies Java, records synthetic review, exports the JAR, compiles the
external host, replays withdrawal, reviews and releases the synthetic amendment, and
exports/restores history. The acceptance condition is the complete recorded sequence
and exact historical replay.
A generated JAR alone is insuﬀicient.
The equivalent
named scenario is legalmath acceptance --scenario spi-23ec35 --offline --out
NEW_DIRECTORY. The listing documents an available command; it was not rerun for this
merge.
For a fresh environment, create a Python 3.11 virtual environment. Install the locked
dependencies from requirements-dev.lock, then install the local package without re-
solving new dependencies. Use the retained JDK 17 or separately verify a compatible
27


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
JDK 17. The package does not require the adjacent research environments. Its local
service exposes five review/operation views and 22 API paths, with a packaged API
console and no CDN dependency. The selected generated Java API is the String/Map
interface explained in Chapter 7.
Fresh isolated
demonstration
Inspect exact ex-
ecution evidence
Keep prior accepted
records intact
Figure C.11: Reproduction creates new evidence without overwriting the original run.
The retained commands for engineering acceptance are:
.venv/bin/python -m pytest -q
.venv/bin/python scripts/check_contracts.py
.venv/bin/python scripts/check_spec_pack.py \
--runtime legalmath.conformance:evaluate_case
python3 scripts/check_execution.py
The application result record binds the actual prior commands and environment. API
tests used a trusted host context because the agent sandbox blocked a minimal thread-
wakeup probe. Changing pinned dependencies to conceal that environment difference
would not have answered the test question. No full application suite has been rerun
simply because the manuscript was merged.
C.6.3 The current service sequence, including release preparation
The complete service sequence clarifies how the earlier endpoint sketch became an ex-
ecutable control. Import the source and create a draft bundle. Resolve its coverage,
scope and issues under authenticated identities. Build the candidate with its decision
and event cases. Only then prepare an external release manifest from the build hash,
verification hash, applicability hash and valid interval. Meaning and engineering ap-
provals bind that exact manifest; release activation consumes its hash, the expected
revision and the activation instant. This order avoids requiring a report to contain its
own future approval.
The implemented paths are shown below. All paths have the prefix /v1; brace names
identify path parameters. Reads require the local authenticated identity, and muta-
tions additionally require the caller-scoped idempotency key. Domain records have
their own typed validation. Request bodies cannot grant the caller a role, and unknown
fields are rejected.
28


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Table C.5: The current 22-path service, before the proposed
ensemble extension.
Method and path after /v1
Operation and decisive input
POST /sources/import
Source ID, oﬀicial URL, retrieval time, media
type and optional uploaded bytes; uploads
remain unverified.
POST /bundles
Validate and store the complete immutable
rule bundle.
GET /bundles/{bh}
Retrieve the exact bundle and its recorded
state.
POST /bundles/{bh}/coverage
Record the provision inventory with an
expected revision and authenticated meaning
review.
POST /bundles/{bh}/issues/{issue_id}
Resolve an issue with reason, time and
expected revision.
POST /applicability
Record the supported business scope and
rule-version context.
POST /bundles/{bh}/build-java
Supply decision cases and optional event cases;
build and verify the candidate.
POST /release-manifests
Bind build, verification and applicability
hashes to a valid interval.
POST /bundles/{bh}/review
Submit, reject, approve meaning or approve
engineering; require expected revision and the
relevant manifest identity.
POST /bundles/{bh}/release
Activate the exact release-manifest hash at an
explicit time under the required approvals.
Prepare the
tested release
Obtain exact-
manifest approvals
Activate the ap-
proved version
Figure C.12: The historical API separates preparation, approval and activation.
Method and path after /v1
Operation and decisive input
POST /fact-records
Retain dated, evidenced facts and explicit
supersession records.
POST /snapshots
Resolve a bundle, subject, assessment time and
knowledge cutoff into a snapshot.
POST /evaluations
Evaluate the exact bundle/snapshot/rule and
both times; production also resolves the release
and operational time.
GET /evaluations/{ident}
Retrieve the preserved request and result.
POST /event-streams
Create the attributed stream header before
appending events.
29


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Method and path after /v1
Operation and decisive input
POST
/event-streams/{stream_id}/events
Append an event under an expected revision;
enforce header attribution and ordering.
POST
/event-streams/{stream_id}/replay
Replay using both times, profile version and
the supplied completeness evidence.
POST /comparisons
Compare old/new bundles over a declared
domain and both times, within the bounded
solver budget.
POST /drafts
Run the current deterministic candidate fixture
with source inventory, up to three responses
and at most three attempts.
GET /jobs/{ident}
Retrieve persisted asynchronous status and
result references.
POST /jobs/{ident}/cancel
Cancel work without manufacturing a partial
successful result.
GET /changes/{old_hash}/{new_hash}
Inspect structural and definition impact;
semantic comparison is a separate operation.
For example, the current evaluation body names bundle_hash, snapshot, rule_id,
valid_at,
known_at and a mode of draft, production or replay.
The optional
release_hash and operational_at supply release context; merely sending the word
“production” does not authorize a bundle. A malformed canonical input is a boundary
failure. A well-formed but semantically invalid snapshot instead produces the defined
error result. This distinction is part of the interface’s observable behavior.
These paths supply the earlier 22-path execution route. The later E01–E09 increment
adds interpretation operations with separate records and budgets, bringing the gener-
ated API to 33 paths. The original drafting endpoint retains its separate deterministic-
fixture behavior.
C.6.4 What the acceptance checks add, and what they leave open
Contract regeneration reproduced 31 JSON files, including the current OpenAPI
contract, byte for byte. Separate clean build directories produced identical JAR bytes,
stale injected class files were excluded, and a non-Java-17 toolchain was rejected.
Python/Java comparisons exclude their intentionally different backend identities
while independently reconstructing each native result hash. The generated policy in
the exact JAR is invoked, so comparison does not merely exercise a generic runner
while leaving the generated binding unchecked.
The fresh-install check used a non-editable installation in a new environment. The
browser record covers five Chromium views, an authenticated request, mobile
layout and keyboard expansion of a rule tree.
The first browser harness used a
string-evaluation wait that conflicted with the application’s content-security policy.
Replacing that wait with locator assertions repaired the harness while retaining the
policy. These checks establish local engineering behavior; they do not constitute an
30


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
independent compliance-reader usability study.
The restricted discovery client also recorded 159 product-circular index entries over
two pages in the 22 September refresh. Page identities and cursor evidence are retained.
Tests cover repeated pages, changing totals and fetch errors. The actual 23EC53/26EC22
replacement relationship is represented, and 25EC48 remains a review announcement
without an invented numerical rule. This is a selected category observation, not the
bank’s entire regulatory perimeter.
The final engineering repairs addressed validation precedence, hashable malformed
snapshots, exact 6,000-digit values, deep inter-rule references, reviewed provision cov-
erage, reviewer attribution of initial snapshots, uploaded-source authority and worker
launch failure. These repairs explain why source identity, validation and failure out-
comes are part of observable semantics rather than incidental implementation details.
The evidence is retained under artifacts/runs/acceptance and artifacts/runs/
mvp-accepted. The acceptance manifest binds 119 input identities; its supplemental
record binds 36 evidence files and the documented browser-harness revision. The walk-
through, build, verification, release and archive records provide the route from a source
packet to the external Java call and restored historical decision. They remain unmodi-
fied by this merge.
Synthetic local identity
In-memory host
integration
Scripted draft-
ing provider
Figure C.13: The executed workbench still needs production identity, host and model
evidence.
The operational limits are concrete.
Review records and history archives use un-
signed local identities and trust database administration.
The transaction host is
an in-memory integration example rather than durable bank order storage.
PDF
intake has local file/page/text bounds but no operating-system isolation for hostile
documents. The drafting provider is a deterministic fixture. No universal compiler
proof or new-circular automatic interpretation accuracy has been established. Those
limits determine what the ensemble, independent evaluation and bank integration still
have to supply.
The E01–E14 tasks that follow start from this implemented base. They add an inter-
pretation investigation service; they do not rebuild the accepted evaluator or replace
the original oracle with generated answers. This makes the full execution route explicit
while leaving legal meaning, empirical effectiveness and real bank authority as separate
acceptance questions.
31


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
C.7 The scripted interpretation increment completed
on 23 September
At the 23 September checkpoint, the increment implemented E01–E09. Its retained final
acceptance records 205 regression tests, all 35 RuleIR conformance cases, regeneration
of 42 JSON contracts, a 33-path API, Chromium interaction and an offline installed
wheel check. The phase counts overlap and are not additive. These are the recorded
results in docs/implementation/interpretation-round1/execution-report.md and
its hash-bound acceptance files, rather than a new execution of the whole suite during
this document revision.
The distinction from a live interpretation service is concrete. The controller accepts sup-
plied proposals and a supplied repair through its scripted provider. It retains source
units, alternative families, root issues, action reservations, terminal reports and exact-
version review. It does not discover the correct English interpretation by a newly eval-
uated model. General argument adjudication, paid retrieval, live generation of alterna-
tive families and calibrated legal error probabilities remain outside this increment.
Supplied incom-
plete proposal
Controller executes
supplied repair
Java and report checks
record the result
Figure C.14: The executed increment tests the investigation machinery with scripted
proposals.
The demonstration makes that limitation observable. A synthetic candidate omits the
product-type promotional route. Named case g02 detects the change; a supplied repair
restores the disjunct. The corrected Java build agrees with the retained 22 named cases
and 729 abstract assignments, and a solver witness is replayed in Python and Java. This
supports the repair’s encoding behavior under the adopted interpretation. It supplies
no independent legal judgment.
The real retained 23EC46 candidate keeps its original five legal questions and two miss-
ing Code/FAQ dependencies. Its report therefore carries seven unresolved material
issues, and the candidate remains DRAFT and unreleased. The repaired synthetic in-
vestigation also retains its unresolved meaning and structural review. A separate fully
resolved synthetic fixture exercises the positive release path with test identities. Com-
bining these outcomes into a claim that the circular was approved would change their
meaning.
32


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Encoding repair
passes its cases
Seven source or
legal issues remain
Release stays blocked
Figure C.15: Repairing an executable omission does not supply missing authority.
At this historical checkpoint, restricted providers, reference construction, comparison
and search remained subsequent work. Later rounds implemented live development
generation, bounded search, source checks and local Java integration, as described in
Appendix A. Fair empirical evaluation and bank identity, data and operational integra-
tion remain unfinished. The earlier API tables retain their role as design explanations;
exact interfaces must be checked against the generated OpenAPI contract and current
command help.
C.8 Extend the existing product at a defined boundary
The current repository already has source intake, RuleIR validation and execution,
event replay, Java generation, review records, build and release manifests, and a local
service interface. Its drafting provider is a deterministic fixture. The new work is an
interpretation investigation service between source intake and approval of a candidate
bundle. Replacing the entire runtime would discard useful engineering evidence and
enlarge the task unnecessarily.
The extension accepts a retained source packet, an activity profile and an explicit investi-
gation policy. It creates inventories, candidates, arguments, discrepancies and bounded
actions. Its output is a report and, when appropriate, one or more validated draft bun-
dles. The existing review and release services remain responsible for approval and ex-
port, with an additional requirement that the interpretation report and its unresolved
issues be checked.
Existing source and
RuleIR services
Interpretation
investigation
Existing review and
release controls
Figure C.16: The extension adds investigation at a defined product boundary.
This boundary has two advantages. The interpretation service can evolve its candidate-
generation methods without changing deterministic production execution. The Java
path can be verified independently of any particular model provider. A candidate that
33


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
requires an unsupported operator is returned as an engineering question rather than
forcing a runtime change through an unreviewed model output.
The companion contracts define the interpretation.v1 extension. They are stored in
docs/monograph/contracts. E01–E09 now implement the public-source, scripted in-
crement described below. The retained task descriptions state its obligations; provider
integration, independent evaluation and bank deployment remain later work. The ac-
companying ordered task file identifies dependencies and acceptance conditions. An
implementation agent should read this chapter with those files and the existing v0.1
runtime contracts; it should not infer additional authority from illustrative code in the
manuscript.
C.9 Separate durable records from generated prose
The service needs a small set of durable record types. A run binds the source packet, ac-
tivity profile, policy and required ensemble roles. A candidate binds a proposed mean-
ing to a formal representation and its assumptions. An issue records a discrepancy and
its evidence need. An action records one authorized external operation. A report rec-
onciles the run’s evidence and terminal status. Review decisions and source coverage
records connect these objects to human authority and document completeness.
Generated prose is a field within these records, not their controlling structure. A model
may write an explanation saying an issue is resolved, but the service changes the issue’s
resolution status only through a validated transition with the required evidence. A
sentence saying “approved by compliance” has no effect unless an authenticated review
record exists for the exact object.
Generated explanation
Validated can-
didate record
Authenticated decision
Figure C.17: Prose describing approval cannot create approval.
Identifiers are stable opaque strings within a namespace; content hashes identify im-
mutable payloads. These roles should not be confused. A run identifier remains stable
while events accumulate, whereas each immutable candidate revision has a new con-
tent identity. A human-readable title can change without becoming the primary key.
References use identifiers and, where integrity requires it, the expected content hash.
Timestamps use the project’s canonical UTC format. Durations are integer milliseconds
or seconds with explicitly named units. Counts are nonnegative integers. Monetary
reservations use exact minor units and a named billing currency. No field called cost
should leave the unit or estimated-versus- actual distinction implicit. This discipline
prevents the controller from comparing incompatible budgets.
34


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
The schemas reject unknown properties. This catches misspelled limits and unrecog-
nized status fields rather than ignoring them. Structural validation is only the first step:
the service also verifies references, state transitions, source compatibility, budget arith-
metic and role authority. JSON Schema cannot prove that a source passage supports
an interpretation or that two referenced objects belong to the same run.
C.10 The run and policy records
A run records its immutable configuration hash, source packet hash, profile identifier,
required roles, creation time, deadline and current lifecycle state. It also references its
candidate, issue, action and report collections. Mutable projections such as counters
are derived from durable events or updated transactionally with them; they are never
trusted solely because a client submits a number.
The lifecycle begins with initialization, proceeds through initial proposals and reso-
lution rounds, and ends in ready-for-review, blocked-unresolved, cancelled or failed-
integrity. A ready-for-review run is complete enough to present, not released. A run
that is blocked can still contain useful validated candidates. The API returns them with
the block, rather than suppressing all information because the overall investigation is
incomplete.
The policy supplies all material resource and coverage choices. It names required roles,
maximum initial actions, maximum resolution rounds, per-root and global action caps,
no-progress limit, action timeout, run duration, candidate count, argument-node count
and dependency depth. It also declares whether monetary and token caps are enforced.
Configuration validation checks internal consistency, such as requiring the initial-action
cap not to exceed the global cap.
Immutable run policy
Counters and ab-
solute deadline
Terminal status with
remaining uncertainty
Figure C.18: A run’s bounds remain tied to the configuration under which it began.
The reference fixture policy is deliberately explicit:
Listing C.3: Reference limits for deterministic controller fixtures.
{
"schema_version": "interpretation.v1",
"policy_id": "fixture-policy.v1",
"use": "DETERMINISTIC_FIXTURE_ONLY",
"max_initial_actions": 4,
"max_resolution_rounds": 3,
"max_actions_per_issue_root": 3,
"max_actions_total": 12,
"max_no_progress_rounds": 2,
35


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
"action_timeout_seconds": 30,
"run_deadline_seconds": 600,
"max_candidates": 24,
"max_argument_nodes": 200,
"max_dependency_depth": 6,
"token_cap": null,
"cost_cap_minor_units": null
}
The candidate, graph and dependency bounds make local processing tractable for fix-
tures. Reaching one opens or preserves an incompleteness issue. These numbers are
convenience choices for engineering tests, not selected production defaults. A paid
provider configuration must add enforceable cost and token reservations, and its de-
ployment policy must explain why the chosen limits are suﬀicient for the intended
workload.
A policy version is immutable once used. Changing a cap during a run requires an
explicit authorized amendment event if that capability is later implemented; the first
prototype should instead require a successor run. This keeps budget semantics simple
and prevents a worker from extending its own authority. The successor links to the
prior report and explains why additional work is justified.
C.11 The candidate record carries the interpretive
commitment
A candidate has a parent revision, source references, subject unit, controlled- language
statement, formal bundle reference, assumptions and interpretation family. The family
identifies a consequential choice, such as component versus whole-offer assessment. It
is not merely a cluster label assigned by a text embedding. A candidate can belong to
several dimensions, but its changed choices must be explicit relative to its parent.
Each assumption has a statement, provenance and status. Possible statuses include
supported by inspected source, factual evidence required, provisional modeling choice,
disputed and rejected. A known fact in a runtime snapshot must not be created directly
from a disputed assumption. The candidate-to-fact mapping is a reviewed transforma-
tion with its own evidence requirements.
Supporting and opposing arguments reference source spans or other arguments. An
argument distinguishes premises, inference rule and conclusion, and labels strict versus
defeasible inference where that distinction is used. If an argumentation procedure is
unavailable for a particular structure, these records still support a structured review
interface. Later work implements typed challenges and bounded argument analysis,
without a general legal-priority procedure. The service must not label the resulting
graph as formally evaluated until the selected semantics has actually been run.
36


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Two candidates
share one formula
Different defini-
tion assumption
Different source
commitment
Figure C.19: Formal deduplication must preserve interpretive differences.
Candidate status distinguishes active, deferred, defeated, unsupported and selected-
for-review. Deferred means not yet suﬀiciently investigated, not false. Defeated re-
quires a recorded reason under the chosen argument and authority policy. Unsup-
ported means the current record lacks adequate support. Selected for review is a pre-
sentation decision; only a separate authenticated decision can approve the candidate’s
meaning.
The record includes score components with definitions and calibration status. The ini-
tial contract permits a scheduling priority and categorical evidence states. It explicitly
leaves probability of legal correctness null. Later calibration can add a versioned, nar-
rowly defined score, but cannot reinterpret old uncalibrated priorities as probabilities
after the fact.
Source and assumption identity survive formal deduplication. If two candidates share
an identical RuleIR body, the body can be stored once. Their distinct assumptions and
source mappings remain separate candidate records. This prevents a compiler opti-
mization from erasing the very disagreement the workbench is intended to expose.
C.12 The issue and action records make automatic
work accountable
An issue names its root, parent if any, run, source units, affected candidates, semantic
dimension and materiality. It records the observed discrepancy and the question that
would resolve it. Processing state and resolution state are separate fields. A terminal
processing state can coexist with unresolved meaning.
Resolution evidence is typed. A source-based resolution references retained spans and
the reviewer or deterministic rule that accepted them. An adjudication references the
authenticated decision. An equivalence resolution references the comparison report,
domain and confirmation that no distinct source commitment remains. A bare model
statement is not a valid resolution-evidence type.
An action names the run, issue root or initial role, round, permitted action type, input
hashes, adapter, timeout, reservation and current state. It also stores the idempotency
key, lease owner, fencing token and terminal result reference. The action’s question and
37


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
success criterion are immutable after dispatch. Changing them creates another counted
action.
The action result separates transport success from substantive progress. A model re-
quest can return valid JSON yet fail to provide any supported new proposition. A re-
trieval can succeed technically while returning the wrong version. A solver can com-
plete normally with an unknown result. The adapter reports its technical outcome, and
the controller validates whether the result answers the action’s question.
Issue names miss-
ing evidence
Action asks a
bounded question
Validated evidence
permits closure
Figure C.20: Transport success alone cannot resolve an issue.
External text is untrusted data. It cannot name a new tool and cause execution, change
a budget, alter role permissions or select an arbitrary filesystem path. Permitted actions
come from a server-side registry. The model can propose an action from that registry,
but the controller validates its applicability and reserves resources before dispatch. This
is both a security boundary and a way to keep the method’s stopping proof connected
to actual behavior.
Typed evidence records bind their content hash, source context, validation state and
origin action or review. Source spans, factual records, validated repairs, formal com-
parisons and human adjudications are distinct evidence kinds. A formal comparison
additionally names its domain and result; an unknown result cannot close an equiva-
lence issue. The companion checker rejects unvalidated closure and equivalence claims
supported only by a repair narrative. Establishing legal suﬀiciency and authenticated
review authority remains a service and review responsibility beyond JSON validation.
The issue record retains attempted actions even when they fail. It is often useful to
know that an oﬀicial dependency was unavailable at the assessment cut-off, that two
classification prompts produced no new evidence, or that a formal check was outside
the supported fragment. Those facts explain why the investigation stopped and what
would justify reopening it.
C.13 Coverage records connect source units to
consequences
A coverage record maps each inventoried unit to one or more dispositions: imple-
mented rule, contextual explanation, definition dependency, separate obligation, re-
viewed out-of-scope provision, or unresolved question. The record includes the reason
and responsible reviewer where a legal judgment is involved. A paragraph can have
more than one role; it may contain both a definition and an operative condition.
Coverage validation first checks that the record refers to the same source hash as the
38


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
inventory. It then checks that every inventoried unit appears, every referenced rule
or issue exists, and any claim of implemented coverage has a validated bundle and
verification evidence. It cannot decide the substantive adequacy of a legal disposition
from structure alone, so that judgment remains an explicit review obligation.
Previously missed
footnote found
Oﬀicial bytes
unchanged
Extraction and cov-
erage need revision
Figure C.21: An extraction correction can invalidate review without a regulatory
amendment.
Dependencies are edges with types and versions. An incorporated definition is stronger
than a background analogy in the sense that missing it can directly prevent interpreta-
tion of the selected rule. The impact service uses these edges to identify affected candi-
dates when a source changes. A generic document list would not tell the service which
conclusions depend on which definitions.
The source inventory itself is versioned and reviewed. An improved extractor may find
a previously missed footnote without any change to the oﬀicial bytes. That creates a
new derivative and inventory revision, not a new oﬀicial source publication. Candi-
dates whose coverage was assessed against the older inventory need reconsideration.
Distinguishing source revision from extraction revision makes that event explainable.
For the second circular, the executable scope remains paragraph 10.
The coverage
record must retain all eighteen paragraphs and four footnotes with their respective dis-
positions. A machine-readable count of one implemented paragraph and seventeen
other paragraph dispositions is more honest than a banner saying “circular translated”
without a denominator. The report can still present the selected slice as a successful
engineering example while showing why whole- document release is not established.
C.14 Storage transactions and event history
The first implementation can extend the existing transactional store. Tables for runs,
candidates, issues, actions, coverage revisions, reports and review decisions store
canonical payloads with indexed identity and relationship fields. Foreign keys protect
references, unique constraints protect idempotency, and transactions protect coupled
state changes. The exact storage engine can remain the existing local choice for the
prototype; bank deployment requires its own availability and administrative-control
assessment.
39


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
The most important transaction reserves an action. It reads the current run and root
counters under a lock or equivalent serializable mechanism, checks all limits, inserts the
action and outbox row, increments counters and appends the audit event. If any step
fails, none commits. A later worker cannot dispatch an action that lacks the committed
reservation.
Lock and check
remaining budget
Insert action and
increment count
Commit reserva-
tion and outbox
Figure C.22: Coupled accounting changes belong in one transaction.
A resolution transaction similarly checks the issue revision, validates the resolution ev-
idence, updates the issue projection and invalidates dependent results when necessary.
It does not modify immutable candidate or source blobs. The event history records
what changed and why, while the current projection supports eﬀicient queries. Recov-
ery can rebuild projections or verify them against the event sequence.
Client idempotency is scoped by authenticated caller and operation. Repeating the
same key with the same canonical payload returns the existing result. Reusing the key
with a different payload returns conflict. The service must not accept a client-supplied
role in the payload as authority. Authentication determines the caller and its permitted
operations.
The local audit log is useful for reproducibility but is not automatically tamper-resistant
against a database administrator. A bank deployment may require external append-
only storage, signed checkpoints or equivalent controls. Those choices are part of the
operational security design, not properties conferred by calling a table an audit log. The
prototype should preserve enough identity and ordering information to integrate such
controls later.
C.15 An API with reviewable state transitions
The proposed HTTP extension uses asynchronous jobs for investigation and explicit
resources for review. Creating a run requires the source packet, profile, configuration
and idempotency key. The server validates all references and returns a run identifier
and job reference. It does not block the request until every model has completed.
40


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Table C.7: Proposed interpretation-service operations.
Existing v0.1 endpoints remain separate.
Operation
Purpose
Required behavior
POST
/interpretation-runs
Create a bounded
investigation
Validate source/profile/policy;
authenticate caller; idempotent
creation
GET
/interpretation-
runs/{id}
Inspect current state
Return counters, phase,
terminal reason and linked
resources
POST
/interpretation-
runs/{id}/cancel
Stop new automatic
work
Preserve outstanding actions
and produce a cancelled report
GET
/interpretation-
runs/{id}/report
Retrieve a report
version
Expose blocked and failed
reports as well as review-ready
ones
GET
/interpretation-
issues/{id}
Inspect a discrepancy
Return candidates, evidence
need, attempts and status
separately
POST
/interpretation-
issues/{id}/decisions
Record human
adjudication
Require reviewer authority,
expected revision and exact
evidence links
POST
/interpretation-
runs/{id}/successors
Authorize further
work
Require reason, new policy
and lineage; never reset the old
run
Create bounded
investigation
Inspect persistent
job and issues
Retrieve complete
terminal report
Figure C.23: The API preserves an inspectable investigation through asynchronous
work.
These paths preserve the original design sketch. The executed E01–E09 increment has
a generated 33-path OpenAPI contract whose exact request models govern the imple-
mented interface. Some proposed paths were consolidated or renamed; a caller must
use that generated contract. The book’s path table states responsibilities; the machine-
readable schema files state the record shapes.
Malformed requests return boundary errors without creating partial runs. Missing ref-
erences and incompatible source versions return semantic validation errors. A stale
expected revision returns conflict so the reviewer can reload the changed issue. Unau-
thorized decisions fail without writing a review or audit entry that suggests acceptance.
The service records denied-operation security evidence through its appropriate logging
channel without pretending that the mutation succeeded.
41


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Pagination must preserve completeness. Collection responses include stable cursors
and total or explicitly unknown counts; reports bind the complete underlying collection
hashes. A user-interface page showing twenty issues cannot imply that only twenty ex-
ist. Exports include all issue records or a manifest identifying every page, with integrity
checks that detect omission.
C.16 The review interface should expose the decisive
difference
A reviewer should begin with the source passage and the decision under review, not
a wall of model transcripts. The interface shows the activity and subject profile, the
candidate’s controlled-language rule, and the facts needed to apply it. A neighboring
comparison shows the strongest surviving alternative and a scenario where the out-
comes differ.
The discrepancy view explains the type of uncertainty. Missing factual evidence should
lead to a data request; unresolved meaning should lead to a legal question; unsupported
runtime operations should lead to engineering work. Mixing these under a single con-
fidence badge makes review slower and encourages the wrong remedy. The interface
can use concise status labels, with the full evidence one step away.
Source references open the retained version and highlight the exact span. A live link
is useful for checking current authority, but it should not replace the retained version
used in the run. If the live document differs, the interface shows the change and of-
fers a successor investigation. This prevents a reviewer from unknowingly approving
a candidate against a document that changed after its creation.
Proposed reading
Strongest sup-
ported alternative
Case where their
consequences differ
Figure C.24: A review screen should make the decisive difference visible.
Two review moments require different records. An adjudication during the run binds
the issue revision, candidate and source context; it cannot require a hash of a final
report that does not yet exist.
The eventual report includes that adjudication.
A
subsequent final review binds the immutable report and candidate. The companion
issue-decision and review-decision schemas keep these directions separate and
avoid a circular report-to-decision hash dependency. Neither record alone authorizes
deployment.
A decision form asks for the proposition being accepted, the evidence relied on, the
treatment of the strongest objection, the scope of the decision and any conditions.
It does not ask only for a confidence slider. The authenticated role and exact can-
42


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
didate/report hashes are supplied by the service. The reviewer cannot approve an
unseen revision through a stale browser tab.
Unresolved reports remain useful work products. They can present a focused question
for the next authorized reviewer, show which offers are affected and identify a tempo-
rary operational policy proposal. The interface should make clear whether that policy
is a bank choice or a conclusion about the regulator’s rule. This distinction is central to
keeping cautious operations from becoming false statements of law.
C.17 Provider adapters are deliberately narrow
A provider adapter accepts a typed task and returns a bounded response plus usage and
execution metadata. It has no direct database credentials for approvals, release records
or budgets. It cannot invoke arbitrary tools selected in model text. The controller sup-
plies the exact retained sources and permitted retrieval scope, and the adapter reports
which inputs were actually sent.
The initial interface can support three adapter kinds: scripted fixtures, retrieval tools
and model proposals. Scripted fixtures are essential because they make failures repro-
ducible. Retrieval adapters return bytes and acquisition metadata for validation. Model
adapters return structured proposals and source references that the controller checks.
All adapters use the same action identity and timeout accounting.
Typed permitted task
Narrow provider
adapter
Validated response
and usage record
Figure C.25: A model adapter has proposal authority, not release authority.
The adapter must distinguish refusal, abstention, malformed output, transport failure,
timeout and unknown remote result. Treating them all as an empty answer would
lose the reason a mandatory role is incomplete. It must also report hidden provider
behavior, such as automatic retries or server-side tool execution, when that behavior
affects resource accounting or evidence provenance. An integration that cannot bound
these behaviors is unsuitable for the unattended profile.
Prompt templates are versioned source files. They state the role, source perimeter, re-
quired structured fields and prohibition on treating source text as instructions to the
system. The prompt should ask for assumptions and opposing reasons, but those re-
quests do not make the response reliable by themselves. Validation and independent
evidence remain necessary.
The service stores provider and model identifiers, relevant sampling settings, template
version and source hashes. A provider alias that changes its underlying model must
be recorded as such. Reproducibility may be limited even with these fields, so reports
distinguish replay of a retained response from regeneration of a fresh model response.
43


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
Deterministic execution of an accepted bundle does not depend on reproducing the
model’s original generation.
C.18 Security protects the meaning of the evidence
The source packet can contain malicious or misleading instructions, whether through
a compromised document, an uploaded file or quoted text. The interpreter must treat
them as source content, not commands. A paragraph saying to ignore prior rules cannot
change the controller’s budget or authentication policy. The model’s task is to analyze
that text within the source context; tool permissions come from the server.
Acquisition should retain the existing restrictions on HTTPS destinations, redirects,
public addresses, response size and time. A user-supplied URL does not establish of-
ficial authority. Uploaded documents remain unverified until a separate process es-
tablishes provenance. A source that is useful for comparison may still be ineligible to
support release.
PDF parsing needs an isolation boundary in a bank deployment. The current local
prototype’s bounded parser is not an operating-system sandbox for arbitrary hostile
files. A production intake worker should have limited filesystem and network access,
resource limits and a narrow output contract. This protects the workbench without
changing the legal interpretation method.
Untrusted source
text says ’approve’
Read it as docu-
ment content
Server keeps ap-
proval permissions
Figure C.26: Source instructions cannot grant tool or reviewer authority.
A malicious attachment may contain a sentence asking the system to approve its own
interpretation. That sentence is evidence to inspect, not an authenticated review. The
server must reject an approval operation regardless of how persuasively the document
requests it.
Bank factual data and public regulatory sources have different access needs. The initial
ensemble prototype should use public sources and synthetic scenarios. Sending client
or transaction data to a model provider requires the bank’s approved data-handling
arrangement. The architecture supports minimizing that exposure: legal interpretation
can often use abstract fact patterns, while production evaluation remains inside the
bank with the generated Java package.
Logs must avoid becoming an uncontrolled copy of sensitive evidence. Store references
44


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
and necessary metadata in operational logs, retain full evidence in access-controlled
stores, and make redaction policies explicit. A redacted report must preserve enough
structure to explain its limitations. Redaction cannot silently remove the only evidence
supporting an approval while leaving the approval summary apparently complete.
Security tests should use concrete attacks: source text that requests a tool call, candi-
date output containing executable markup, a URL redirecting to an internal address,
an oversized graph, a forged reviewer role and an action result that tries to change
its run identifier. The expected behavior is rejection or safe treatment as data, with a
recorded reason. These tests protect the authority boundaries on which the interpreta-
tion method relies.
C.19 The ordered implementation sequence
The implementation should proceed in small stages that each produce a reviewable
capability. The first stage freezes contracts and builds deterministic examples. The next
adds persistence and budgets. Only after the controller behaves correctly with scripted
members should it call live model providers. This sequence avoids confusing stochastic
model behavior with defects in state management.
Table C.8: Original extension work packages at the 23
September checkpoint.
Later generation, search and
integration progress is recorded in Appendix A; these
task descriptions are historical.
ID
Deliverable
Acceptance condition
E01
Contract models and
reference policy
All valid examples pass; extra fields,
incompatible limits and invalid transitions
are rejected.
E02
Source inventory and
dependency records
Every retained unit has a disposition; missing
or mismatched units create issues even under
unanimous proposals.
E03
Immutable candidate and
assumption store
Revisions retain parents and source hashes;
changing a definition invalidates dependent
candidates.
E04
Issue identity and
lifecycle
Child issues inherit root accounting; terminal
unresolved states cannot masquerade as
resolutions.
E05
Atomic budget and
outbox service
Concurrent reservations never exceed caps;
crash recovery preserves issued counts and
fencing.
E06
Scripted provider and
controller
Omission repair, persistent ambiguity,
timeout, no-progress and cancellation traces
match the specification.
45


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
ID
Deliverable
Acceptance condition
E07
Structured comparison
and witnesses
Different source contexts are detected;
supported formal differences replay in
Python and Java.
E08
Complete report and
review interface
Every issue and mandatory role is
represented; dissent and unexplored families
remain visible.
E09
Review and release
integration
Exact report/candidate/build identity is
required; all stale or unresolved release
attempts are rejected.
E10
Restricted retrieval and
model adapters
No uncounted retries or model-directed tools;
malformed and unavailable responses retain
distinct outcomes.
E11
Independent reference
corpus
Source and scenario judgments are frozen
before model outputs; disagreement and
adjudication are retained.
E12
Equal-budget evaluation
harness
Baselines share source access and cost
accounting; uncertainty and abstention
metrics are reported together.
E13
Optional
argumentation/search
extension
Small reference graphs and
family-preservation tests pass; incomplete
search remains explicit.
E14
Bank integration and
shadow operation
Real identity, host mappings, operational
dispositions and rollback procedures are
approved and exercised.
E01–E09 scripted
increment
E10–E12 providers
and evaluation
E14 bank integration
Figure C.27: Implemented engineering and outstanding empirical and deployment
work remain distinct.
Dependencies matter. E05 depends on the record and issue contracts, while E06 needs
E05 and a scripted adapter. E09 depends on complete reports and existing release iden-
tity checks. E10 can be developed behind the adapter interface, but live evaluation
should wait for E11 and E12. E13 is optional until the simpler scheduler’s limitations
are measured; it must not delay a clear implementation of bounded disagreement han-
dling.
Each task should specify files to add or extend, existing interfaces to reuse, acceptance
identifiers and evidence locations. The companion task JSON provides that structure
without changing the existing master plan’s completed T00–T22 history. These are new
extension tasks, not a retroactive claim that the earlier MVP failed to implement its
agreed scope.
46


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
An implementation agent should stop a task for a genuine contract inconsistency, miss-
ing authority or unavailable required infrastructure. It should not stop merely because
a scripted candidate fails: detecting that failure is often the acceptance criterion. A
failed interpretation candidate can trigger the next planned repair phase while still
blocking release. The task record distinguishes those outcomes.
C.20 Acceptance scenarios that exercise the whole
cycle
The first end-to-end fixture uses the explicit type-of-product omission. It freezes the
source packet, emits two candidates, creates a discrepancy, reserves a repair action,
validates the revised formula, reruns affected checks and produces a report. The report
is ready for review only if all other required coverage and dependencies in that fixture
are complete. The real second-circular packet remains blocked where its dependencies
are unresolved.
The second fixture uses the cashback ambiguity with no resolving authority. It must
preserve both supported candidates through the configured rounds and end in a
blocked report.
The test checks not only the terminal status but also the attempt
history, retained objections, question for the reviewer and absence of release authority.
This scenario prevents an implementation from treating exhaustion as permission to
choose the highest score.
The third fixture tests unanimous omission. All candidate providers return the same
incomplete rule, while an independent inventory identifies an uncovered source unit.
The controller must open a material issue despite unanimous agreement. If it does not,
the ensemble has implemented voting rather than the proposed method.
Omission repaired
Ambiguity persists
Stale approval rejected
Figure C.28: Whole-cycle scenarios test different legitimate outcomes.
The fourth fixture tests failures under concurrency. Two workers attempt the last avail-
able reservation, one crashes after dispatch, and a stale worker later returns a result.
Exactly one reservation may consume the remaining slot; the crashed action remains
counted; the stale result cannot overwrite a newer state. The test uses a controlled clock
and scripted transport so it is reproducible. Real distributed-system testing later ex-
tends this fixture under the deployment infrastructure.
The fifth fixture tests invalidation. A reviewer approves a candidate and report, then
a source derivative reveals a previously omitted footnote. The affected coverage and
interpretation records become stale. Release with the earlier approval must fail until
47


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix C
the impact is reviewed and the required checks rerun. An unchanged Boolean body
does not bypass the source-coverage question.
The sixth fixture tests report recovery. A run is cancelled or encounters a malformed
provider response. The service must still produce a complete terminal report from
durable records. If rich rendering fails, a minimal machine-readable report must re-
main available. The acceptance condition is not a pretty success screen; it is a recon-
structible account of what happened.
C.21 The first vertical slice and its completion rule
A useful first vertical slice implements E01–E09 with scripted members and the public
second-circular packet. It exercises source inventory, competing candidates, a repair, a
persistent ambiguity, a report and the existing Java path. It does not need an expensive
model integration to test whether the controller’s logic is coherent. This is the smallest
product-shaped demonstration of the proposed method.
Completion requires more than green unit tests.
The service must generate an in-
spectable report from a fresh run, preserve the exact input and output identities, show
all unresolved issues in the interface, and reject a release attempt for the blocked ex-
ample. A separate synthetic fully resolved fixture can demonstrate the positive review
path using local test identities. Its approval status must remain clearly synthetic.
Fresh scripted
investigation
Complete in-
spectable report
Independent live-
model study
still needed
Figure C.29: The vertical slice demonstrates the controller’s specified behavior.
The implementation note should record the command, environment, source hashes,
policy, result files and any departures from the design. If a departure changes meaning,
budget accounting or approval behavior, it requires a contract revision and new accep-
tance cases. Minor internal choices can be made by the agent, but must not silently alter
observable semantics.
Live models then replace scripted proposal adapters without changing the controller
contract. That transition creates a new empirical question: whether the methods find
useful alternatives and omissions on unseen circulars at acceptable cost. The next chap-
ter supplies the reference process, baselines and uncertainty analysis needed to answer
that question. Engineering completion of the vertical slice is a prerequisite for that
study, not its result.
48


Appendix D
Detailed comparison tables
The tables in this appendix preserve the complete comparison records behind the
shorter tables in Chapters 4, 6 and 9. They are lookup material. A reader who wants
the argument can remain in the main chapters; an implementer can use these tables to
recover the full row-by-row specification.
D.1 Ensemble responsibilities
Table D.1: Responsibilities that create different opportunities to detect error.
Role
Question answered
Failure that must remain visible
Source inventory
What material is present and
incorporated?
Missing attachment, unmatched
paragraph, inaccessible
dependency
Normative reader
What obligations, conditions and
exceptions are expressed?
Omitted modality, scope or
qualification
Alternative
reader
What supported choice changes a
consequence?
No supported alternative found;
unexplored family
Argument critic
What defeats the premises or
inference?
Unanswered objection or
unverified authority
Formal checker
What follows from this specified
rule?
Invalid encoding, unknown solver
result, limited domain
Reference
reviewer
What is expected for this scenario,
and why?
Disagreement, incomplete facts,
shared authorship
Java checker
Does this package preserve the
accepted specification?
Mismatch, unsupported
operation, stale build
Dossier assembler
Are all required results and
dispositions present?
Missing member, open issue,
broken evidence link
D.2 Resolution evidence
49


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix D
Table D.2: Discrepancy-specific actions and closure ev-
idence.
Discrepancy
Appropriate next action
What can justify closure
Missing
source unit
Compare original rendering
and independent inventory
Retained unit, corrected inventory
and reviewed disposition;
agreement among summaries is
insuﬀicient.
Unavailable
dependency
Retrieve the named version or
seek authorized clarification
Inspected applicable source, or an
explicit adjudication of the
remaining question; a guessed
definition is insuﬀicient.
Different
source
versions
Establish the assessment
cut-off and amendment
relationship
A documented version selection
and reconsideration of affected
candidates.
Actor or
activity scope
Inspect addressee, operative
language and profile facts
Reviewed applicability
proposition with evidence for the
actual bank activity.
Classify the
discrepancy
Obtain the rele-
vant evidence
Close only the
question answered
Figure D.1: Resolution requires evidence of the appropriate kind.
Discrepancy
Appropriate next action
What can justify closure
Disputed
classification
Identify definition and
distinguishing factual
evidence
An accepted definition and
suﬀicient facts, or an attributable
adjudication; a Boolean label alone
is insuﬀicient.
Exception
attachment
Construct component and
whole-arrangement examples
Source-grounded structural choice,
with contrary reading disposition
and regression cases.
Necessary
versus
suﬀicient
condition
Compare implication
directions on boundary
scenarios
A reviewed direction of
dependence and a rule that
preserves other required
conditions.
Timing or
transition
Separate publication,
commencement, valid time
and knowledge time
Reviewed interval and transition
rule with endpoint examples.
Factual
conflict
Obtain correction or apply an
approved evidence-priority
rule
Attributable supersession or
reviewed normalization; newest
arrival alone is insuﬀicient.
50


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix D
Discrepancy
Appropriate next action
What can justify closure
Formal
mismatch
Produce and replay a feasible
difference witness
Validated repair or
domain-qualified equivalence,
with source assumptions retained.
Unsupported
operation
Inspect whether a supported
encoding preserves meaning
Reviewed encoding plus
conformance evidence, or an
approved runtime extension;
compiler rejection does not defeat
the reading.
Java mismatch
Compare full semantic results
and trace
Corrected exact package with
repeated affected verification and
new build identity.
Missing
ensemble
member
Retry under budget or use an
authorized replacement
Required role output with
documented independence limits;
silence is not agreement.
Search
truncation
Investigate retained frontier
or narrow the claimed scope
Completed declared finite search
or explicit reviewed restriction; a
high best score is insuﬀicient.
Broken
approval
lineage
Reconstruct exact source,
report, bundle and build links
Fresh valid approvals for exact
identities; a matching display title
is insuﬀicient.
D.3 Software and standards considered
Table D.4: Candidate software and standards, with a deliber-
ately bounded role.
Candidate
Contribution to LegalMath
Limit or prototype decision
Catala
Literate definitions, exceptions,
executable decisions and
verification-condition ideas.
Compare one adapter on the
SPI decision fragment; do not
assume event-workflow
coverage or end-to-end verified
compilation. (Catala
contributors, 2026)
DMN 1.5; Apache
KIE / Drools
Standard decision tables and
Java-oriented decision execution.
Preserve hit policies, explicit
unknown handling and
explanations. Add a separate
event model. (Object
Management Group, 2024;
Apache KIE contributors, 2026)
51


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix D
Candidate
Contribution to LegalMath
Limit or prototype decision
LegalRuleML
Source, authority, interpretation
and normative metadata for
interchange.
Adopt a small profile; a
reasoner and execution
semantics are separate
components. (OASIS
LegalRuleML Technical
Committee, 2021)
Stipula;
Stipula–KeY
Contract states, permissions,
scheduled events and a Java/JML
proof experiment.
Research adapter for a small
workflow; document event
abstraction and loop
restrictions. (Stipula
contributors, 2026a,b)
eFLINT
Normative simulation, duties and
violations, including actions that
occur despite a prohibition.
Borrow concepts and compare a
bounded scenario; pin the
implementation and semantics
version. (van Binsbergen et al.,
2026)
L4
Legal DSL, regulative rules, event
traces, IDE and generated decision
services.
Candidate for a later
authoring/core comparison;
documentation does not
establish equivalence with
RuleIR. (Legalese contributors,
2026)
Symboleo
Obligation/power lifecycles and a
model-checking toolchain.
State-model alternative;
preliminary paper case and
software inspected, later
journal paper remains a
retrieval gap. (Sharifi et al.,
2020; Smart Contract Modelling,
University of Ottawa, 2026)
Regorous / PCL
Defeasible norms connected to
annotated business processes.
Pilot evidence supports the
method; deployed version,
availability and license remain
adoption questions.
(Governatori et al., 2016)
Blawx / s(CASP)
Visual rule authoring,
explanations and hypothetical
reasoning.
Authoring experiment; Blawx
describes its current scope as
educational and experimental.
(Lexpedite, 2026; Arias et al.,
2024)
Z3; existing Lean
route
Counterexamples, satisfiability,
selected invariants and checked
proof targets.
Specify supported theories and
assumptions; preserve timeout
and unknown outcomes. (Z3
contributors, 2026; LegalMath
research notes, 2026b)
52


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix D
Candidate
Contribution to LegalMath
Limit or prototype decision
OpenFisca
Versioned computable rules and a
tax/benefit microsimulation
architecture.
Useful design analogue; the
primary problem here includes
conduct and workflow duties.
(OpenFisca contributors, 2026)
Open Policy
Agent
Rego policies evaluated against
structured data; potential
deployment adapter.
Its undefined-value behavior
must be reconciled with the
legal rule semantics. It supplies
no natural-language legal
interpretation. (Open Policy
Agent contributors, 2026)
Accord Project /
Cicero
Adjacent work on digital contracts
and reusable contract technology.
Monitor for
document/template integration;
a fixed contract template differs
from an amended regulatory
corpus. (Accord Project, 2026)
D.4 Cross-circular acceptance cases
Table D.5: Initial acceptance scenarios for the selected scope.
Case
Synthetic fact or source change
Required demonstration
F1
Portfolio HK$40m; qualifying net
assets HK$0.
Establish the financial condition via
the inclusive portfolio comparison.
F2
Portfolio HK$35m; qualifying net
assets HK$90m.
Establish the financial condition via
the alternative net-asset route.
F3
Portfolio unknown; qualifying net
assets HK$70m.
Leave the financial condition
unresolved; identify missing
portfolio evidence.
F4
Portfolio unknown; qualifying net
assets HK$80m.
Establish the financial condition via
the known suﬀicient route.
F5
Assets HK$120m, liabilities HK$15m,
primary residence HK$30m.
Derive HK$75m for the illustrated
net-asset calculation; assess the
separate portfolio route
independently.
O1
HK$60m joint portfolio with a
non-associate; written client allocation
20%.
Use HK$12m for this portfolio-share
illustration; explain the agreement
and actor roles.
K1
Transaction-experience route
established only for one category; a
different category proposed.
Do not propagate a global experience
flag; inspect the alternative
qualification routes and selected
categories.
53


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix D
Case
Synthetic fact or source change
Required demonstration
C1
A qualifying wealth record, but
conservative investment objectives.
Explain the investment-objective
exclusion; wealth alone does not
establish SPI treatment.
E1
Designated-account monitoring
selected; exposure rises above
threshold without new funds.
Show the relevant FAQ conditions
and restrictions; avoid a universal
transaction-block rule.
E2
A withdrawal instruction precedes a
proposed streamlined decision in the
adopted event order.
Use the changed consent state and
retain the original instruction and
ordering evidence.
T1
A third-party verification clause with
an SFC-request trigger.
Preserve the trigger; distinguish an
absent request from missing request
records.
T2
Old tokenisation source replaced by
the 2026 circular.
Preserve both editions, record
replacement, identify affected rules
and reproduce historical decisions.
M1
Product-linked gift versus a discount
of fees or charges.
Preserve the stated exception and the
scope of the cited marketing
provision.
M2
Daily dealing fund with weekly
redemption versus a different daily
cut-off.
Distinguish reduced dealing
frequency from administrative
procedure.
D1
A thematic-review announcement
enters the source collection.
Classify and track the announcement
without inventing a new numerical
eligibility criterion.
D.5 Evaluation evidence contract
Table D.6: Proposed evidence contract for the prototype eval-
uation. These are prospective criteria, not results.
Evidence
Definition and use
Decision role
Material interpretation
and decision defects
Independently adjudicated errors in
source coverage, rule meaning,
resulting decisions or obligations.
No unresolved critical defect may be
carried into a proposed operational
scope.
Primary quality
criterion; blocks
promotion of the
affected scope.
Review effort
End-to-end person-time for a
completed, accepted change,
including source work, corrections,
escalations and reusable-rule
preparation.
Primary business
criterion, conditional on
quality.
54


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix D
Evidence
Definition and use
Decision role
Unknown and review
outcomes
Frequency, reason, downstream
handling and time to resolution;
distinguish necessary abstention
from unhelpful failure.
Explanatory diagnostic
and business cost;
incorrect silent
resolution is a quality
defect.
Source and
dependency
completeness
Every in-scope rule has inspected
support and resolved imports; every
required selected clause is
accounted for.
Release veto for the
selected corpus. Does
not establish
completeness of all HK
regulation.
Adapter agreement
and mutations
Supported semantics agree; targeted
changes in operators, scope, dates
and exceptions are detected by the
required checks.
Engineering veto on the
adapter; mutation
scores alone do not
establish legal fidelity.
Reproducibility
A saved rule version, fact snapshot
and event sequence reproduce the
original result and explanation
references.
Engineering veto on
historical replay.
Latency and
token/runtime cost
Measure on the specified local
workload, including failed drafts
and review retries.
Explanatory and
operating-budget
evidence; no quality
trade-off is implied.
D.6 Operational readiness evidence
Table D.7: Evidence required for a bounded deploy-
ment decision.
Area
Evidence to inspect
Question that remains a
human responsibility
Meaning
Source inventory, candidates,
objections, adjudication
Is this reading justified for the
selected activity and time?
Data
Fact dictionary, provenance,
validity, conflict policy
Do the bank’s records
establish the facts the rule
needs?
Execution
Conformance, witnesses,
mutations, Java comparison
Is the supported
implementation scope
adequate for the process?
Authority
Exact manifests, reviewer roles,
signatures
Are the required people
authorized and accountable
for this release?
55


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix D
Area
Evidence to inspect
Question that remains a
human responsibility
Operation
Host dispositions, race tests,
fallback and incident rehearsal
Can staff act correctly when
the result is unknown or
blocked?
Evidence
Retained sources, histories,
reproducible reports
Can a later reviewer
reconstruct the decision
without relying on memory?
D.7 Recording a method-comparison decision
The main volume explains how a comparison affects a decision. This table retains the
fields needed to record the result consistently.
Table D.8: Decision record required after a substantive method comparison.
Decision field
Required interpretation
Primary criterion
State the observed result and uncertainty against the frozen
criterion.
Veto status
Identify severe errors, integrity failures and invalid comparisons
before discussing speed.
Viable candidates
List methods that remain eligible for further evaluation; do not
imply an unsupported ranking.
Main uncertainty
Distinguish reference ambiguity, sampling error, distribution shift
and untested implementation.
Next justified action
Promote a bounded use, extend the study, repair a mechanism, or
rebuild an invalid harness.
Limit of conclusion
State the source perimeter, task population and deployment
claims not established.
56


Appendix E
Software interfaces and reproduction
notes
This appendix records the concrete software interfaces and historical examples behind
the main narrative. It is intended for someone reproducing or extending the implemen-
tation. The mathematical definitions, worked decisions and proof assumptions remain
in the main chapters.
E.1 The earlier SPI compiler: a concrete deployment
lesson
The API and commands in the next five subsections belong to the retained SPI-Demo1
teaching example under examples/java- dry- run/. They remain reproducible, but
are not the current v0.1 SDK. The subsequent section on the actual generated interface
supplies the current String/Map API. Keeping both makes the translation mechanism
inspectable without directing an implementer to the wrong library.
Java is the required deployment output. The authoring workbench may use Python for
source processing, review and reference evaluation; a transaction must be able to call
the released Java library without running Python or contacting a language model. The
initial integration assumption is a plain Java 17 JAR. This keeps the decision code inde-
pendent of Spring, application servers and particular rule engines. A bank on another
Java version needs a declared target and the same conformance checks before receiving
a compatible build.
E.1.1 SPI-Demo1: the narrower retained demonstration
The delivered SPI-Demo1 example contains a source-anchored RuleIR bundle, synthetic
fact snapshots, a separately written Python evaluator, a deterministic Java emitter, the
generated class, two small Java support classes, and a separate host caller. Its imple-
mented expression subset is deliberately explicit: Boolean, integer and HK-cent literals
and facts; unconditional rule references; all, any, not; and exact numeric eq/ge/gt com-
parisons. The root has a Boolean scope. The demo compiler rejects dates, arithmetic
expressions, general defaults, conditionals and the full obligation language. The later
RuleIR implementation supports the specified decision operators and its finite duty pro-
file; those features are outside this earlier demo API. The demonstration response is its
own smaller API profile, not a claim to implement every field and trace node of the full
57


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
RuleIR service.
SPI-Demo1’s lim-
ited operators
Full RuleIR runtime
Different API and
evidence sets
Figure E.1: The early compiler example and the later runtime have distinct scopes.
The distinction matters for an implementing agent. The example demonstrates an ac-
tual compiler and integration path that can be extended. It does not silently turn the 35
general RuleIR contract fixtures into executed tests. Those fixtures were the completion
target for the full interpreter and backend and were subsequently executed by the ac-
cepted MVP. The separate SPI example has 32 executed decision scenarios and eleven
consent histories, with its own recorded evidence.
E.1.2 The SPI-Demo1 input and output boundary
The public API accepts an immutable Snapshot, a time being assessed and a knowledge
cutoff. A Snapshot binds a subject identifier to the declared fact map. A Fact carries a
declared scalar type and one of known, unknown or conflict. A known Boolean is a Java
Boolean; a known monetary or count value is a BigInteger. Its evidence identifiers,
validity interval and recording time are mandatory. Unknown has a reason and no
value. Conflict identifies competing evidence.
The host supplies every declared field, using an explicit unknown where evidence is
unavailable. Omitting a field or supplying the wrong type is a malformed request, not
a legal conclusion. Validity intervals are half-open: evidence valid until 10:00 does not
establish a fact at 10:00. Evidence recorded after the knowledge cutoff is unavailable
to that replay. The API takes canonical UTC timestamps with six fractional digits; con-
version from a Hong Kong business timestamp belongs in the host adapter and must
preserve the intended instant.
Listing E.1: The library API and one dated monetary input.
DecisionRuntime.Result evaluate(
DecisionRuntime.Snapshot snapshot,
String validAt,
String knownAt);
// A known value is exact and supported by dated evidence.
Fact portfolio = Fact.known(
"money_hkd", new BigInteger("4000000000"),
List.of("valuation.lee", "ownership.lee"),
"2026-09-01T00:00:00.000000Z",
"2026-10-01T00:00:00.000000Z",
"2026-09-01T00:00:00.000000Z");
58


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
Fact missingPortfolio = Fact.unknown("money_hkd", "MISSING");
The first amount is HK$40 million expressed in cents.
A bank adapter reading
a decimal amount should specify the currency, use exact decimal arithmetic and
reject an unsupported fraction of a cent after the adopted conversion.
In Java,
amount.movePointRight(2).toBigIntegerExact() can enforce exact cents after that
policy has been applied. Calling doubleValue() first would discard the property the
specification is trying to preserve. For a currency conversion, the exchange-rate source,
date, direction and rounding rule are part of the evidence mapping.
Exact dated Snapshot
SPI-Demo1 evaluation
Tagged result
and disposition
Figure E.2: The earlier Java interface illustrates the input and output boundary.
The result contains a logical status and an operational disposition:
Status
Disposition
Host meaning
TRUE
Conditions met
Selected streamlining conditions
established; continue the other
controls.
FALSE
Standard process required
At least one required condition is
refuted; do not apply this streamlined
route.
UNKNOWN
Review required
Evidence can change the conclusion;
show blocking inputs.
CONFLICT
Review required
Resolve inconsistent evidence;
preserve both records.
OUT_OF_SCOPE
Outside profile
Select another implemented profile or
the standard process.
The demo’s JSON includes profile, authority, both timestamps, the bundle and snap-
shot hashes, a postorder rule trace, missing and blocking input lists, and the result hash.
A rule-trace entry gives its identifier, status, source-anchor identifiers and blocking in-
puts. Source anchors resolve through the bundle included with the release. Known
values and their evidence remain in the preserved snapshot. The current RuleIR im-
plementation provides expression-node traces, standardized diagnostics and engine
identity through the different v0.1 API documented later in this chapter.
A malformed request throws an explicit Java input exception in this small library. The
production adapter must map that exception, a timeout or an unavailable release to
a technical-failure result and a review/standard-process path. It must never catch an
exception and substitute a successful Boolean. The demonstration result always car-
ries DEMONSTRATION_ONLY; production authority requires a different, approved release
record and enforcement by the host deployment process.
59


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
E.1.3 How the compiler emits final Java rather than a suggestion
The emitter first validates the JSON schema, references, identifiers, types and acyclic
rule graph. It then assigns an internal Java method name to each rule and recursively
emits its expression. Identifiers are validated data, never pieces of executable text sup-
plied by a language model. The generated monetary comparison is represented by
actual Java calls such as:
Listing E.2: The generated financial method’s essential body. The complete class is built
and tested in the supplied example.
return c.rule("spi.financial", sourceIds, () ->
any(
compare("ge", c.fact("portfolio"),
Value.of(new BigInteger("4000000000"))),
compare("ge", c.fact("net_assets_ex_home"),
Value.of(new BigInteger("8000000000")))
));
compare returns a known Boolean when both operands are known, or an unknown
with its blocking input names. any implements the truth table in Equation (3.9). Java
evaluates its arguments before calling the method, so both branches have the speci-
fied eager evaluation and evidence collection. Replacing this with Java’s short-circuit
|| would change the trace and missing-input behavior even where the final Boolean
agreed. The context memoizes referenced rules and records their results in a stable or-
der. A precheck detects conflicting facts in this profile’s dependency set before normal
expression evaluation.
Typed compari-
son in RuleIR
BigInteger com-
parison in Java
Same inclusive
integer ordering
Figure E.3: The monetary comparison preserves meaning only if the input mapping
preserves units.
The production emitter should implement one mapping per supported operator, with
an explicit error for every unsupported construct. It must not ask an LLM to write new
Java on each regulatory change. The LLM can propose the typed specification; after
review, a deterministic compiler performs the mechanical translation. This concentrates
semantic review on a small language and makes the generation step reproducible.
For the money comparison, the preservation argument is short. The IR represents
both amounts as mathematical integers of HK cents. The Java boundary constructs
the same integers as BigInteger values. The emitted comparison returns true exactly
when compareTo is nonnegative, which expresses the same inclusive ordering. The ar-
gument depends on the input mapping preserving those integers. It would fail if the
adapter truncated decimals, mixed currencies or overflowed a narrower integer before
60


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
constructing the value. For a complete compiler, analogous local arguments must be
composed for every operator, unknown/error case, rule reference and trace require-
ment. The delivered tests check examples of preservation; they are not that universal
proof.
E.1.4 Reproduce the build and see the host result
The repository retains a project-local Temurin JDK 17 for this check, verified against
the oﬀicial archive checksum. It does not change the machine’s default Java installation.
From the repository root, the single build command is:
python3 examples/java-dry-run/build_and_verify.py \
--jdk .localresources/java-toolchain/jdk-17.0.20.1+1
The Python authoring check uses the already available JSON Schema package. The gen-
erated Java library itself has no third-party runtime dependencies. The build uses javac
--release 17 -Xlint:all -Werror; creates the JAR; compiles the separate fixture and
host callers against that JAR; compares complete reference and Java results; and runs
the three mutations. The package has fixed ZIP timestamps to make repeated builds
with the same toolchain reproducible. The verification record stores compiler identity,
source/compiler/JAR digests, the executed command, results and limitations.
Compile source
and runtime
Verify the exact JAR
Call it from a
separate host
Figure E.4: The demonstration crosses the actual Java library boundary.
The delivered files below are operational copies of the design, not additional reading
needed to understand why it works:
File under examples/java-dry-run/
Purpose
spec/spi-control.bundle.json
Source-linked typed interpretation for the
chosen profile.
spec/decision-cases.json;
spec/consent-cases.json
Independent expected statuses and synthetic
evidence/history inputs.
reference.py; compile_java.py
Separate reference evaluation and
deterministic Java generation.
generated/GeneratedSpi.java
Final generated decision class.
src/main/java/hk/legalmath/spi/
Evidence, result, three-valued arithmetic/logic
support and consent replay.
build/spi-controls-demo.jar
Compiled library callable by a Java host.
generated/BankHostExample.java
Complete synthetic host caller using the public
API.
build/verification.json;
build/host-output.txt
Executed validation and host results.
61


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
The separate host prints these dispositions for the synthetic history:
BEFORE_WITHDRAWAL STREAMLINING_CONDITIONS_MET
AFTER_WITHDRAWAL STANDARD_PROCESS_REQUIRED
RESULT_AUTHORITY DEMONSTRATION_ONLY
This is the concrete answer to how final code reaches Java: the bank depends on the
released library, constructs the declared evidence snapshot through its adapter, calls
the generated class and handles its structured result. The compiler, public circulars and
drafting tools are build-time/review-time components. They need not be deployed into
the bank’s order-processing process.
E.2 The actual generated Java interface
The current emitter validates the bundle, canonicalizes it and embeds its exact bytes
in a generated class. The class name is hk.legalmath.Policy_ followed by the first
twenty hexadecimal digits of the bundle hash. The class exposes the full bundle hash
and delegates evaluation to the Java semantic runtime. This is a generated, immutable
policy binding; it is not the older proposal’s imagined record-based API or a proof that
each legal rule has been translated to hand-optimized Java control flow.
The two current entry points are:
Listing E.3: Implemented generated-policy API.
public static String evaluate(
String snapshotJson,
String ruleId,
String validAt,
String knownAt,
String mode);
public static Map<String,Object> evaluate(
Map<String,Object> snapshot,
String ruleId,
String validAt,
String knownAt,
String mode);
The string overload returns strict JSON. The map overload returns a deeply immutable
result. The generated policy and Java runtime operate without Python, a language
model, a solver or network retrieval. This property is important for a bank integration:
the interpretation workbench prepares and verifies a package, while production deci-
sion execution can remain local and deterministic.
A concrete host compiles against the actual generated class name from the build man-
ifest. It supplies a validated snapshot, exact rule identifier, both assessment times and
the requested mode. The mode does not grant authority. A caller cannot turn a draft
62


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
into an approved control by passing the word “production.” The release service and
host must establish approval and applicability separately.
Generated class
binds bundle bytes
String or Map
entry point
Immutable se-
mantic result
Figure E.5: The current generated policy delegates to the verified runtime.
The conceptual integration looks as follows. The symbolic class name in the listing is
replaced by the actual generated name when the integration fixture is built; the release
lookup and transaction methods are host responsibilities.
Listing E.4: Host responsibilities around deterministic evaluation.
ApprovedRelease release = releases.resolve(profile, validAt, knownAt);
release.verifyAuthorityAndDigests();
ConsistentSnapshot s = adapter.readSnapshotWithVersions(subject, order);
String resultJson = Policy_HASH.evaluate(
s.strictJson(), release.ruleId(), validAt, knownAt, "production");
Decision decision = decoder.decodeStrictly(resultJson);
HostDisposition disposition = hostPolicy.map(decision);
transactions.commitIfVersionsUnchanged(
s.versions(), order.id(), order.payloadHash(),
release.identity(), decision, disposition);
ApprovedRelease, ConsistentSnapshot and the host transaction interfaces in this illus-
tration are proposed integration concepts, not classes already supplied by the generated
SDK. Their responsibilities must be implemented in the bank’s environment. The ex-
ample makes the boundary explicit so an agent does not mistake illustrative types for
an existing dependency.
The host must handle every tagged result. A true selected prohibition condition may re-
quire stopping the relevant offer; false permits only progression to other controls under
the host policy. Unknown, conflict, out-of-scope and error each have explicit disposi-
tions. No result string should be cast to a Boolean by a language’s truthiness rules. The
decoder rejects unknown status tags so that a future runtime extension cannot silently
take an old default branch.
E.3 What can be reused from the adjacent projects
DynareMCP contains useful patterns for explicit hypotheses, diagnostics, falsifiers and
limits of claims. In the inspected legacy audit writer, write_hypothesis_node records a
hypothesis, source support, code support, a diagnostic, a falsifier and a supplied rank
score. These fields map naturally to interpretation candidates. The supplied score is
not automatically calibrated; its meaning depends on the caller.
63


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
The inspected legacy scheduler chooses among eligible frontier nodes by a stored pri-
ority and identifier. It is not a general UCT engine hidden behind the word “tree.”
Reusing its bookkeeping ideas is sensible; importing it and claiming that a proven
Monte Carlo search now verifies legal meaning would be wrong. The new controller
needs its own issue identity, source lineage, legal review states and resource account-
ing.
Adjacent
project’s function
Explicit local
assumptions
Bounded adapter check
Figure E.6: Reuse must name a concrete capability and the changed context.
MathDevMCP is useful once a proposition is precise enough to prove. A formal obli-
gation might concern preservation of a Boolean expression, absence of an unbounded
loop in a finite controller model, or equivalence of two encodings over a declared do-
main. ResearchAssistant supports retrieval, parsing and retention of the literature and
regulatory evidence. Neither project supplies a privileged interpretation of English.
They strengthen different links in the chain.
The design that follows therefore combines several structures: a source inventory to
detect missing material, a candidate set to expose choices, an argument graph to record
reasons, a bounded search to investigate questions, and formal checks to compare ex-
ecutable consequences. The diversity is useful because each structure can reveal mis-
takes that the others overlook. Its value will depend on how discrepancies move be-
tween them, which is the central subject of the next chapter.
E.3.1 Adapter boundaries and the earlier reuse assessment
The earlier repository inspection contributes the adapter requirements below. The pre-
ceding analysis identifies the actual search-controller differences; references here to his-
torical UCB-style investigations do not override that finding or establish that a generic
MCTS service is already available.
The adjacent projects supply reusable patterns and potential adapters. They are not
interchangeable components of a legal reasoner. Their local code and documentation
were inspected at the revisions recorded in the source manifest (LegalMath research
notes, 2026b). The proposal makes no change to those repositories and does not assume
that their current interfaces implement the proposed legal semantics.
ResearchAssistant is useful immediately for source intake, local storage, parsing, dis-
covery and structured review records. It was used in this investigation to discover lit-
erature and parse retained PDFs. The available extraction route used pdftotext and
reported low confidence requiring manual review. LegalMath needs a regulatory layer
above it: circular identifiers, annex relationships, paragraph anchors, versions, replace-
ment links and an applicability inventory. PDF extraction quality must be assessed on
the actual source layout, especially footnotes and tables.
64


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
MathDevMCP is useful after a property has been formalized. Its inspected Lean route
binds checks to an exact target and assumptions, and its result handling distinguishes
diagnostic evidence from proof. Its source-bound obligations and resumable evidence
structures can support the question in Equation (3.2). The legal adapter must define
the rule language’s semantics, numeric and date operations, and the exact theorem
requested. Structural agreement between a formula and a code fragment is not a sub-
stitute for semantic equivalence. The inspected project describes an internal research
status and has its own licensing terms; reuse within a bank needs the appropriate soft-
ware and ownership review.
ResearchAssistant:
source processing
MathDevMCP:
scoped mathematics
DynareMCP: bounded
investigations
Figure E.7: Adjacent tools contribute different capabilities, each requiring local valida-
tion.
DynareMCP supplies ideas for investigative planning, source graphs and meaningful
differences between model versions. Its economic-model parser and numerical solvers
are not direct engines for SFC requirements.
The reusable pattern is a reviewable
change supported by a dependency graph, with unresolved alternatives preserved.
A legal adapter would compare rules, definitions, scope and dates rather than
macroeconomic equations.
The proposed search use is equally specific.
Historical DynareMCP investigation
records use UCB-style exploration to choose work; the currently inspected MathDe-
vMCP derivation controller explicitly describes a different bounded evidence-ordering
method, not MCTS. It would be inaccurate to label both as the same proof-search
engine (LegalMath research notes, 2026b).
For LegalMath, a search node could contain a candidate interpretation and its unre-
solved questions. Actions might retrieve a referenced FAQ, request a counterexample,
check a definition, or prepare a question for a compliance owner. A search score may
prioritize expected information gain or reduction in review work. It cannot determine
which interpretation is legally correct. A branch with more permissive outcomes or
more successful solver calls receives no special authority. If several readings remain
viable, the product retains the disagreement.
Start with a bounded work queue ordered by materiality and dependencies. MCTS
or UCB scheduling becomes a candidate only if the prototype reveals a substantial
search-allocation bottleneck. Its evaluation would compare useful questions resolved
per unit of review effort under the same budget, while correctness continues to depend
on source review and formal evidence. Transaction execution uses approved rules, with
no exploratory search in the decision path.
65


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
E.3.2 A reproducible research collection
The papers are stored under docs/papers/ using the requested filename convention:
the title, an underscore, the first author’s surname and the year in parentheses.
Filesystem-unsafe title punctuation is normalized, while the manifest retains the
original title. Each record includes its source URL, bibliographic identity, edition note,
retrieval date, byte count, PDF page count and SHA-256 digest. The library index
distinguishes distinct works from alternate editions and identifies discovery leads that
were not available as usable full text.
The technical notes identify which part of each paper supports a proposed borrowing
and what remains untested. They distinguish a semantics from its implementation, a
reported experiment from a reproduced result, and a publicly available repository from
a licensed and approved bank dependency. Full-text extraction is retained for local
search, but the source PDF remains the reference where layout or equations matter.
ResearchAssistant extraction is an aid to inspection, not certification of the extracted
text.
Named local
document copy
Exact passage
and source hash
Manuscript claim and
support judgment
Figure E.8: An audit trail must show what was actually read for a citation.
The SFC source snapshots and the earlier local-repository inspection records remain
under .localresources/, with their own manifest. The LaTeX and bibliography are
now canonical in docs/monograph/; the earlier proposal entry point builds the same
unified work. This arrangement permits another reviewer to trace the proposal’s sub-
stantive examples back to a document edition without reconstructing the web searches.
Redistributing the paper library is a separate matter from using the local copies for this
research; the source licenses and access terms remain relevant.
E.4 Exact controller sequence
Listing E.5: Main controller, with explicit terminal uncertainty.
start_run(source_packet, profile, required_policy):
validate_source_identity_and_policy()
commit(run = INITIALIZING, counters = 0)
reserve_and_issue_initial_roles_with_global_budget()
collect_until_complete_or_action_deadline()
validate_outputs_and_freeze_initial_proposals()
reconcile_inventory_candidates_and_required_roles()
while has_unresolved_issue():
if integrity_failure():
66


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
close_as(FAILED_INTEGRITY); break
if cancelled():
close_as(CANCELLED); break
if deadline_or_global_or_round_limit_reached():
mark_remaining_issues_with_stop_reason()
close_as(BLOCKED_UNRESOLVED); break
if no_progress_limit_reached():
mark_remaining_issues(NO_PROGRESS)
close_as(BLOCKED_UNRESOLVED); break
plan = choose_permitted_discriminating_actions()
if plan.is_empty():
mark_remaining_issues(HUMAN_REQUIRED)
close_as(BLOCKED_UNRESOLVED); break
commit_next_round_and_reserve_bounded_actions(plan)
dispatch_only_reserved_actions()
collect_results_until_each_action_is_terminal()
validate_results_and_create_candidate_revisions()
rerun_affected_checks_and_reconcile_all_open_issues()
record_progress_signature()
if not already_closed():
apply_integrity_cancellation_and_deadline_guards()
if not already_closed():
check_required_roles_coverage_and_all_mandatory_checks()
if any_requirement_incomplete():
close_as(BLOCKED_UNRESOLVED)
else:
close_as(READY_FOR_REVIEW)
write_complete_report_for_every_terminal_status()
return report_reference
E.5 Machine-readable blocked-result example
Listing E.6: A blocked result preserves alternatives and the next decision.
{
"schema_version": "interpretation.v1",
"run_status": "BLOCKED_UNRESOLVED",
"source_ref": "23EC46-retained-version",
"selected_slice": "paragraph-10",
"candidate_ids": ["cashback-reimbursement", "cashback-fee-reduction"],
"material_unresolved_issue_ids": ["classification-cashback"],
"release_eligible": false,
"processing_stop": "ROUND_LIMIT",
"rounds_issued": 3,
67


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
"probability_of_legal_correctness": null,
"next_decision": "Establish the applicable fee-discount definition",
"next_decision_owner_role": "LEGAL_INTERPRETATION_REVIEWER"
}
E.6 Exact financial-rule serialization
The complete financial-condition bundle is supplied in fixtures / spi - financial .
bundle . json beneath the specification directory. It declares two money inputs, an
unconditional scope for this isolated subcondition, the expression, interpretation
record and a verified span in Annex 1 paragraph 3.1. The excerpt below is a complete
expression node from that bundle. Node identifiers make its trace reproducible.
Listing E.7: The portfolio comparison in the supplied JSON bundle. Amounts are HK
cents.
{"node_id":"portfolio.ge", "op":"compare", "cmp":"ge",
"left":{"node_id":"portfolio.input", "op":"fact",
"name":"portfolio"},
"right":{"node_id":"portfolio.threshold", "op":"literal",
"type":"money_hkd", "value":"4000000000"}}
The second comparison uses net_assets_ex_home and "8000000000"; an any node com-
bines them. These inputs denote amounts normalized under adopted wealth defini-
tions, not any account balance supplied under the same name. Release requires those
definitions and applicability to be reviewed. The narrow result name, spi.financial,
identifies a subcondition rather than a complete SPI assessment or trade authorization.
E.7 Complete rule-language grammar
An implementer can express the grammar below directly as tagged records. Every
Expr additionally carries a unique node_id.
A rule is (id, type, scope, body,
interpretation_id, source_span_ids); scope is Boolean and body has the declared
result type.
Listing E.8: Complete operator grammar for RuleIR 0.1; repeated arguments are or-
dered. The Java demonstration implements a stated subset.
Type = bool | integer | money_hkd | date
Expr = literal(Type, value)
| fact(name) | rule(name)
| all([Expr, ...]) | any([Expr, ...]) | not(Expr)
| compare(eq | ge | gt, left, right)
| add(left, right) | sub(left, right)
| scale(arg, numerator, denominator)
68


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
| if(condition, then_value, else_value)
| default(base, [Exception, ...])
Exception = (exception_id, guard, value,
interpretation_id, source_span_ids)
E.8 Durable request accounting and worker recovery
An action moves through RESERVED, DISPATCHED, and one of SUCCEEDED, FAILED,
TIMED_OUT, or RESULT_UNKNOWN. The last state is necessary when the controller cannot
determine whether a remote service performed the action. A lost connection after
submission is different from a request rejected before dispatch.
Both can lead to
missing results, but only the former may already have consumed remote work.
The reservation transaction records the action identifier, input hashes, issue root, round,
budget charge, adapter identity, timeout and idempotency key. An outbox entry is writ-
ten in the same transaction. A worker claims that entry with a lease and a fencing token.
The token increases when ownership changes, so an old worker cannot commit a result
after a newer owner has taken responsibility. A valid late result can be retained as an
observation without changing the closed action’s authoritative state.
The dispatch boundary requires care. If the outbox records only “not yet sent” and a
worker crashes after sending but before updating the database, another worker may
send again. A provider idempotency key can make that retry refer to the same opera-
tion, but not every provider supports this guarantee. The adapter must state its capa-
bility. Without remote idempotency, a recovery policy can choose to leave the result
unknown rather than risk another paid request, or authorize a new counted action. It
cannot truthfully promise exactly once remote execution.
The budget system reserves an upper bound on tokens or cost when those resources
are capped. Settlement records actual usage when known. A refund of unused mone-
tary reservation may be legitimate after a confirmed terminal response, but it does not
decrement the issued-action count. Otherwise a sequence of failed requests could evade
the maximum number of attempts. If actual usage exceeds a provider’s documented
bound, the run records an accounting discrepancy and stops new spending until the
integration is investigated.
A compare-and-swap version protects issue updates. The worker returns evidence
against the issue revision it received. If the issue has changed, the controller revali-
dates whether the evidence is still relevant before applying a resolution. This prevents
two simultaneous actions from overwriting each other’s objections or resolving an issue
using a candidate that is no longer current.
Cancellation stops new reservations and attempts to cancel outstanding work. Remote
cancellation may be best effort. The report records outstanding or late actions and keeps
their budget charges. Cancellation cannot convert an incomplete run into a clean result,
and it cannot delete the source of a later adverse finding. These details matter because
regulatory evidence must survive ordinary operational events, including a person clos-
69


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
ing a browser or restarting a worker.
E.8.1 Scope and method of this review
The review began with the seven requested links and expanded through their refer-
ences, forward-citation searches for Catala and Stipula, and searches on executable law,
legal reasoning, formalization, dates, testing and process compliance. ResearchAssis-
tant supplied discovery records and local PDF extraction. The saved OpenAlex citation
searches returned 52 entries for the selected Catala record and 13 for the selected Stipula
journal record. Those are retrieval counts for particular indexed editions, not complete
or comparable measures of influence. Preprints, revised editions and new publications
can be missing or duplicated.
The initial proposal retained 38 paper editions representing 37 distinct works. The first
unified library retained 50 editions representing 49 works, including the later legal-
search and uncertainty studies. The present audit adds two legal-reliability studies,
bringing the academic collection to 52 editions representing 51 works. Regulatory doc-
uments, standards and software records are retained alongside them. The AAAI tax-
reasoning paper and its extended preprint are retained separately; all seven requested
sources are present. Technical reading covered the relevant methods, semantics, evalua-
tion and supporting appendix material. The accompanying notes identify the inspected
sections, version differences, implementation checks and limits of adoption (LegalMath
research notes, 2026a). This is a focused technical review supporting a product decision,
rather than a claim to have enumerated every citation. Unavailable secondary leads are
recorded separately and do not support implementation claims.
The expanded search treats eight families separately: executable statutes; defaults
and defeasible priorities; obligations and violations; temporal process compliance;
authority and provenance; legal languages, compilers and testing; neurosymbolic
formalization and evaluation; and deployable rule engines. Important foundations
predate Catala, while contract languages have partially separate citation com-
munities.
The retained forward-citation records have individual dispositions in
docs/papers/coverage.md; additional searches and backward references supply the
missing mechanisms. Selection favors primary sources that define a needed mecha-
nism or report an informative failure. Downloading a paper or screening its abstract is
distinguished from inspecting its technical method. This is a bounded review of the
prototype’s design questions. Remaining retrieval gaps are stated rather than counted
as read papers.
Version control is particularly important here. The ARc paper was first posted in 2025,
but the inspected second version is from July 2026. The eFLINT paper’s inspected ver-
sion is from August 2026. The Stipula preprint requested by the sponsor has three
authors; the later journal edition has a different author list. Bibliographic records and
local filenames make these distinctions explicit. Published results are reported as their
authors’ findings; none of their benchmarks or proof developments was independently
rerun for this proposal.
70


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Appendix E
E.9 Release identity and reproducible builds
A build manifest records the bundle, generated source, runtime source, toolchain, Java
target, dependencies and JAR digest. A verification report then names the build and ex-
act JAR it tested. A release manifest names that build and verification report, together
with applicability and effective-time information. Approval binds the final release man-
ifest and bundle.
The direction matters. Embedding a manifest that contains the JAR’s own digest inside
that JAR creates a circular identity problem. The current design keeps these records
external and acyclic. A reviewer approves the exact tested bytes through the final man-
ifest, rather than approving a mutable directory or a human-readable version label.
Candidate compilation occurs before legal approval, because reviewers need a concrete
package and verification evidence to inspect. Compilation does not grant deployment
authority. Export into a controlled release route occurs only after the required ap-
provals and checks. This distinction lets engineers do useful reversible work without
repeatedly asking for permission, while preserving the human decision at the point
where it matters.
Reproducible builds strengthen the identity chain. Under the same declared toolchain
and inputs, build in separate directories with fixed archive-entry timestamps and
compare emitted source and binary hashes.
A mismatch should be investigated
and recorded. Reproducibility does not prove semantic correctness, but it reduces
uncertainty about which bytes correspond to the reviewed source.
The local MVP uses synthetic identities and unsigned historical archives to exercise
workflow. A bank deployment needs enterprise identity, role separation, key man-
agement and independently verified release signatures or equivalent controls. A hash
proves equality of bytes under its cryptographic assumption; it does not prove who
authorized those bytes. The manuscript’s implementation plan keeps that integration
distinct from the local demonstration.
71


Bibliography
Accord Project. Cicero, 2026. URL https://github.com/accordproject/cicero.
Oﬀicial repository documentation and stated licensing inspected September 2026.
Apache KIE contributors. Drools, 2026. URL
https://github.com/apache/incubator-kie-drools. Oﬀicial repository
documentation inspected September 2026.
Joaquín Arias, Mar Moreno-Rebato, José A. Rodríguez-García, and Sascha Ossowski.
Automated legal reasoning with discretion to act using s(LAW). Artificial
Intelligence and Law, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2401.14511. 2024 arXiv
copy; journal first published online in 2023.
Catala contributors. Catala: compiler and core formalization repository, 2026. URL
https://github.com/CatalaLang/catala. README, formalization notes and
selected implementation/proof source inspected September 2026; proof not
replayed.
Guido Governatori, Mustafa Hashmi, Ho-Pun Lam, Serena Villata, and Monica
Palmirani. Semantic Business Process Regulatory Compliance Checking Using
LegalRuleML. EKAW 2016, 746–761, 2016. URL
https://inria.hal.science/hal-01572441/document. HAL author manuscript.
Legalese contributors. L4 compiler, IDE and DEONTIC reference, 2026. URL
https://github.com/legalese/l4-ide. README and
doc/reference/regulative/DEONTIC.md inspected; no execution or equivalence
claim.
LegalMath research notes. Paper library, technical reading notes and retrieval
manifest. Local files: docs/papers/README.md, reading-notes.md and
manifest.json, 2026a. 38 PDF editions representing 37 works; expanded notes and
coverage ledger; research snapshot 21 September 2026.
LegalMath research notes. Local project capability and source review. Local files:
docs/sfc-rule-translator-design.md and .localresources/source-manifest.json, 2026b.
MathDevMCP 655a9efeb338, DynareMCP 4bac9dd9733c, ResearchAssistant
9c0008f5c41b; inspected September 2026.
Lexpedite. Blawx, 2026. URL https://github.com/Lexpedite/blawx. README
describes educational and experimental use; inspected September 2026.
OASIS LegalRuleML Technical Committee. LegalRuleML Core Specification Version
1.0, 2021. URL https://docs.oasis-open.org/legalruleml/legalruleml-core-
spec/v1.0/os/legalruleml-core-spec-v1.0-os.html. OASIS Standard, 30 August
2021.
72


LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Object Management Group. Decision Model and Notation, Version 1.5, 2024. URL
https://www.omg.org/spec/DMN/1.5/PDF. Formal specification; hit-policy
discussion in section 8.2.11.
Open Policy Agent contributors. Policy Language: Rego, 2026. URL
https://www.openpolicyagent.org/docs/policy-language. Oﬀicial
documentation inspected September 2026.
OpenFisca contributors. OpenFisca Core, 2026. URL
https://github.com/openfisca/openfisca-core. Oﬀicial repository
documentation inspected September 2026.
Sepehr Sharifi, Alireza Parvizimosaed, Daniel Amyot, Luigi Logrippo, and John
Mylopoulos. Symboleo: Towards a Specification Language for Legal Contracts.
IEEE International Requirements Engineering Conference 2020, 2020. URL
https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1WXwXeLrZdaJjhSJcCrt_
wBXxDvhFkq2k. Author preprint linked by oﬀicial Symboleo repository; some
ancillary semantics references remain anonymized.
Smart Contract Modelling, University of Ottawa. Symboleo editor and model checker,
2026. URL https://github.com/Smart-Contract-Modelling-uOttawa/Symboleo-
Model-Checker. Oﬀicial editor README, sale example and model-checker
README inspected; no nuXmv replay.
Stipula contributors. Stipula implementation and workbench, 2026a. URL
https://github.com/stipula-language/stipula-workbench. Oﬀicial project
repositories; workbench and prototype documentation inspected September 2026.
Stipula contributors. Stipula-to-Java/JML verification implementation, 2026b. URL
https://github.com/stipula-language/stipula-KeY. Oﬀicial translation
repository; Translator.java and documentation inspected, no KeY replay.
L. Thomas van Binsbergen, Christopher A. Esterhuyse, and Tim Müller. Reflections on
the design, applications and implementations of the normative specification
language eFLINT. Journal of Computer Languages, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2511.12276v3. Reviewed arXiv v3, 4 August 2026; journal
title differs slightly; first preprint 2025.
Z3 contributors. Z3 theorem prover, 2026. URL https://github.com/Z3Prover/z3.
Oﬀicial repository documentation inspected September 2026.
73
