LegalMath | Regulatory specification and execution
Chapter 6
assurance/allowlist.json. From the repository root, the bounded execution is:
.venv/bin/python scripts/run_proof_carrying_master.py audit
.venv/bin/python scripts/run_proof_carrying_master.py execute
The application also exposes assurance-dossier and assurance-dossier-verify. The
first accepts a repository root, retained input manifest, output directory, JDK and op-
tional pinned Catala configuration; the second rereads a saved dossier and verifies its
evidence. The input manifest names the packet, candidate set, criticism proposal and
source files by path and SHA-256, and declares the assessment time, probe and pair
limits, required backends and proposal origin. No executable expression from a model
is accepted: the restricted expression parser and typechecker mediate compilation. A
caller can supply another circular’s retained investigation through this same interface.
The interface does not generate fresh readings, acquire missing authority text or au-
thenticate source acquisition merely by accepting their file hashes.
The six phases freeze inputs, validate the contract, exercise the method families, build
this monograph and process guide, run a deliberate stale-target repair, and execute
the full regression. Each phase writes its exact command, environment, input hashes,
result hash and predecessor manifests. After a phase succeeds, the controller refreshes
the next-phase plan from those actual hashes. If a source, implementation or plan file
changes, that phase and every successor become stale before another attempt can run.
A failed phase cannot be retried until an executed repair note and focused regression
are recorded.
The final report is deliberately capable of saying “engineering pass with retained un-
certainty.” The following conditions remain blocking regardless of how many methods
agree: an unresolved authority or source region, an unsupported future clause, a stale
result, a method unavailable for a required target, an incomparable fact vocabulary, an
unknown solver result, an unproved proof obligation, or a missing independent legal
decision. This is the intended connection between the flow chart and the Java system:
Java receives a typed decision and its evidence, while the bank’s host chooses an ap-
proved action for UNKNOWN, CONFLICT, OUT_OF_SCOPE or BLOCKED_UNRESOLVED.
An execution audit rejected the first adapter because it constructed success labels from
descriptions rather than attaching executed evidence. Its original attempts are pre-
served, and its interrupted regression is not an acceptance result. The current repaired
execution writes to artifacts/proof-carrying-assurance/verified-execution-v3/.
The evidence verifier checks every referenced file, candidate-to-bundle link, required
obligation and shared dependency; unresolved obligations block a ready status even
when the method records agree. The original controller’s exceptions for changed su-
pervisor files were removed: changed controller, plan, allowlist or material evidence
requires new acceptance.
The original input-manifest file is itself mandatory evidence. The verifier reparses its
bounded schema and compares it with the configuration embedded in the target before
checking any replay. This closes a further audit finding: an internally consistent embed-
ded configuration had survived removal of the file that originally declared it. Tests now
182
