                  SECOND SUPPLEMENT DATED 6 NOVEMBER 2013
                     TO THE PROSPECTUS DATED 17 JULY 2013
                                                OF


                                   Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                         (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
             (acting through its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch
         or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch or its Luxembourg branch)


                                               and


                                        BES Finance Ltd.
                   (incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands)


                         unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by
          Banco Espírito Santo, S.A (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                               (acting through its London branch)


                                        in respect of their

                     €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme

This Supplement (the “Supplement”) to the Prospectus (the “Prospectus”) dated 17 July 2013
and supplemented on 2nd September 2013, constitutes a second supplement to the base
prospectus for the purposes of article 13 of Part II of the Luxembourg Act dated 10 July 2005
relating to prospectuses for securities (the “Prospectus Act”) and is prepared in connection with
the €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme (the “Programme”) established by
Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the “Bank” or “BES”) and BES Finance Ltd. (“BES Finance”).
Terms defined in the Prospectus have the same meaning when used in this Supplement.

This Supplement is supplemental to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Prospectus
issued by the Bank and BES Finance.

The purpose of this Supplement is to:

(1) incorporate by reference the Bank’s unaudited Consolidated Balance Sheet and Income
Statement for the nine months period ended 30 September 2013 (the “Unaudited Consolidated
3Q13 Accounts”) as set out in the press release dated 25 October 2013; and

(2) update the risk factors contained in the Prospectus.




                                                                                          Page 1
Each of the Bank and BES Finance accepts responsibility for the information contained in this
Supplement. To the best of the knowledge of each of the Bank and BES Finance (who have
taken all reasonable care to ensure that such is the case) the information contained in this
Supplement is in accordance with the facts and does not omit anything likely to affect the
import of such information.

1.   Financial Statements - Unaudited Consolidated Balance Sheet and Income Statement
     for the nine months period ended 30 September 2013

On 25 October 2013, the Bank issued a press release disclosing its Unaudited Consolidated
3Q13 Results.

Information contained in the Unaudited Consolidated 3Q13 Results is expressly incorporated by
reference herein:

Unaudited Consolidated Balance Sheet and Income Statement for the nine Page
month period ended 30 September 2013

Balance Sheet                                                                       41

Income Statement                                                                    42

Any information not listed in the cross reference list above but included in the document
incorporated by reference in this Supplement is given for information purposes only and is not
required by the relevant schedules of Commission Regulation (EC) 809/2004.

Copies of the document incorporated by reference into this Supplement will be published on the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s web site (www.bourse.lu).

2.      Risk Factors

The following paragraphs shall be inserted into the risk factors on page 46 of the Prospectus as a
new section 1.15 (“Risk relating to the proposals to move towards a banking and fiscal union
within the European Union”) and the existing sections 1.15 (Risks relating to BES shareholding
and corporate structure) and 1.16 (The BES Group may be affected by the proposed
introduction of a Financial Transaction Tax (“FTT”)) shall be renumbered sections 1.16 (Risks
relating to BES shareholding and corporate structure) and 1.17 (The BES Group may be
affected by the proposed introduction of a Financial Transaction Tax (“FTT”)):

“1.15   Risk relating to the proposals to move towards a banking and fiscal union within
the European Union

Since 2012, a number of agreements were reached to reinforce the monetary union, including
the definition of a broad roadmap towards a single banking and fiscal union. While support for a


                                                                                           Page 2
banking union in Europe is strong and significant advances will be made in terms of the
development of a single-rule book through CRD IV, there is ongoing debate on the extent and
pace of integration. It has been decided that the European Central Bank (the “ECB”) will play a
key role in supervision; although a consensus on how to dovetail its central position with the
role of national supervisors has not yet been agreed.

On 23 October 2013, the ECB released a note on the comprehensive assessment it will perform
on the banking system, starting in November 2013. The comprehensive assessment is an
essential element of the preparation for the single supervisory mechanism, and will enable the
ECB to obtain all the relevant information it needs to carry out a supervisory risk assessment, an
asset quality review (an “AQR”) and stress test of large banks. The outcome of these measures
may lead to a range of follow-up actions, including an increase in banks’ provisions and capital
requirements.

Other issues are still open, such as the accountability of the ECB to European institutions as part
of the single supervision mechanism, the final status of the European Banking Authority, the
development of a new bank resolution regime and the creation of a common deposit-guarantee
scheme. European leaders have also supported the reinforcement of the fiscal union but continue
negotiating on how to achieve it.

Therefore the regulatory laws governing banking activity may change at any time in ways which
may have an adverse effect on the business of the BES Group. Furthermore, the BES Group
cannot predict the timing or form of any future regulatory initiatives. Changes in existing
regulatory laws may materially affect the way in which the BES Group conducts its business,
the products and services it can offer and the value of its assets.”

Copies of this Supplement can be obtained from the registered office of the Bank and of BES
Finance and from the specified office of the Paying Agent for the time being in Luxembourg.

In addition, copies of this Supplement are available for viewing at the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange’s website (www.bourse.lu).

To the extent that there is any inconsistency between (a) any statement in this Supplement or
any statement incorporated by reference into the Prospectus by this Supplement and (b) any
other statement in or incorporated by reference in the Prospectus, the statements in (a) above
will prevail.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement and any other supplements to the Prospectus, there has
been no significant new factor, material mistake or material inaccuracy relating to information
included in the Prospectus since the publication of the Prospectus.




                                                                                            Page 3
In accordance with article 13 paragraph 2 of Part II of the Prospectus Act, investors who, before
this supplement is published, have already agreed to purchase or subscribe for any Notes to be
issued under the Programme, have the right, exercisable within a time limit of two working days
after the publication of this supplement, meaning 8 November, 2013, to withdraw their
acceptances.

Dated: 6 November 2013




                                                                                          Page 4
