SIXTH SUPPLEMENT DATED 13 JULY 2011 TO THE PROSPECTUS DATED 3 NOVEMBER 2010


                               BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                                     (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                         (acting through its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch
                                   or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch)
                                                          and
                                             BES Finance Ltd.
                              (incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands)
                               unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by
                               BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                                    (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                                          (acting through its London branch)



                   €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme
This Supplement (the "Supplement") to the Prospectus (the "Prospectus") dated 3 November 2010 (as
supplemented by supplements dated 15 November 2010, 3 March 2011, 19 April 2011, 6 June 2011 and 17
June 2011) constitutes a supplement to the base prospectus for the purposes of article 13 of Part II of the
Luxembourg Act dated 10 July 2005 relating to prospectuses for securities (the "Prospectus Act") and is
prepared in connection with the €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme (the "Programme")
established by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the "Bank" or "BES") and BES Finance Ltd. ("BES Finance").
Terms defined in the Prospectus have the same meaning when used in this Supplement.

This Supplement is supplemental to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Prospectus issued by the
Bank and BES Finance.

The purpose of this Supplement is to provide information regarding certain recent developments.

Each of the Bank and BES Finance accepts responsibility for the information contained in this Supplement.
To the best of the knowledge of each of the Bank and BES Finance (who have taken all reasonable care to
ensure that such is the case) the information contained in this Supplement is in accordance with the facts and
does not omit anything likely to affect the import of such information.


1.      Recent Developments



1.1     Banco Espírito Santo informs about the rating decision of Moody’s on the Portuguese Republic

BES announces that Moody's Investors Service (Moody's) downgraded the Republic of Portugal's long-term
government bonds ratings to Ba2 from Baa1 on 5 July 2011 and assigned a negative outlook. Concurrently
Moody's also downgraded the government's short-term debt rating to (P) Not-Prime from (P) Prime-2.


Copies of this Supplement can be obtained from the registered office of the Bank and of BES Finance and
from the specified office of the Paying Agent for the time being in Luxembourg.



                                                                                                            1
In addition, copies of this Supplement are available for viewing at the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s
website (www.bourse.lu).

To the extent that there is any inconsistency between (a) any statement in this Supplement or any statement
incorporated by reference into the Prospectus by this Supplement and (b) any other statement in or
incorporated by reference in the Prospectus, the statements in (a) above will prevail.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement, there has been no significant change in the financial or trading position
of the Bank and the Group since 31 March 2011.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement, there has been no significant change in the financial or trading position
of BES Finance since 31 December 2010.

There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of BES Finance, of the Bank or the Group since
31 December, 2010.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement and any other supplements to the Prospectus, there has been no
significant new factor, material mistake or inaccuracy relating to information included in the Prospectus
since the publication of the Prospectus.

In accordance with article 13 paragraph 2 of Part II of the Prospectus Act, investors who, before this
supplement is published, have already agreed to purchase or subscribe for any Notes to be issued under the
Programme, have the right, exercisable within a time limit of two working days after the publication of this
supplement, to withdraw their acceptances.

Dated 13 July 2011




                                                                                                              2
