 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 3 
 
6. How should intermediaries monitor compliance with the Streamlining Threshold? 
 
Intermediaries are required to establish and maintain effective systems and controls to 
ensure compliance with the Streamlining Threshold.  Intermediaries should ensure the 
gross exposure arising from investment transactions executed under the Streamlined 
Approach remains at or below the Streamlining Threshold upon execution; or 
intermediaries could devise designated accounts (or sub-accounts) to consolidate 
Eligible Investment Transactions of the SPI executed under the Streamlined Approach.  
In the latter circumstances, they should ensure the gross exposure arising from all 
positions maintained in the designated account remains at or below the Streamlining 
Threshold after receiving top-up or deposit of new fund into such designated account. 
 
If a designated account is used for monitoring compliance with the Streamlining 
Threshold, the intermediary should review such Streamlining Threshold with the SPI (i) 
before new fund is added to the designated account, or (ii) at least during the annual 
review.   
 
For the avoidance of doubt, where such gross exposure (or part thereof, except cash) 
was transferred out of the designated accounts, such gross exposure (or part thereof, 
except cash) shall nonetheless continue to be regarded as “the gross exposure arising 
from investment transactions executed under the Streamlined Approach” for the 
purpose of monitoring compliance with the Streamlining Threshold.   
 
That said, intermediaries are not expected to reduce/unwind the gross exposure for the 
purpose of complying with the Streamlining Threshold.  Where the gross exposure in 
the designated account is above the Streamlining Threshold, intermediaries may 
continue to operate (and to execute transactions in) the designated account restricting 
any top-up or deposit; or alternatively, execute investment transactions without 
applying the Streamlined Approach (eg, outside of the designated accounts). 
 
7. Could intermediaries execute leveraged transactions for and/or provide margin 
trading to an SPI under the Streamlined Approach? 
 
Intermediaries could execute investment transactions for an SPI under the Streamlined 
Approach if they fall within the Product Categories and the Streamlining Threshold 
specified by the SPI. 
 
Notwithstanding, intermediaries are required to establish effective systems and controls 
to ensure the gross exposures (including the effect of leverage) arising from investment 
transactions executed under a Streamlined Approach remain at or below the amount 
specified by the SPI when monitoring compliance with the Streamlining Threshold. 