   SUPPLEMENT DATED 24 FEBRUARY 2014 TO THE PROSPECTUS DATED 17
                            JULY 2013
                                   Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                       (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                     (acting through its head office or its Madeira branch
        or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch or its Luxembourg branch)
                                               and
                                        BES Finance Ltd.
                  (incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands)
                           unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by
          Banco Espírito Santo, S.A (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                                (acting through its London branch)
                    €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme

This Supplement (the “Supplement”) to the Prospectus (the “Prospectus”) dated 17 July 2013
and supplemented by the first supplement to the Prospectus dated 2 of September 2013 and by
the second supplement to the Prospectus dated 6 of November 2013,            constitutes a third
supplement to the base prospectus for the purposes of article 13 of Part II of the Luxembourg
Act dated 10 July 2005 relating to prospectuses for securities (the “Prospectus Act”) and is
prepared in connection with the €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme (the
“Programme”) established by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the “Bank” or “BES”) and BES
Finance Ltd. (“BES Finance”). Terms defined in the Prospectus have the same meaning when
used in this Supplement.

This Supplement is supplemental to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Prospectus
issued by the Bank and BES Finance, and with the first supplement dated 2 September 2013 and
the second supplement dated 6 November 2013.

The purpose of this Supplement is to amend the Portuguese taxation regime as set out in the
section of the Prospectus headed “Taxation”, following the entry into force in Portugal of Law
no.83-C/2013, dated 31 December 2013, to update the section on recent developments of the
Bank and to incorporate by reference the press release of the Bank relating to consolidated
financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2013.

Each of the Bank and BES Finance accepts responsibility for the information contained in this
Supplement. To the best of the knowledge of each of the Bank and BES Finance (who have
taken all reasonable care to ensure that such is the case) the information contained in this
Supplement is in accordance with the facts and does not omit anything likely to affect the
import of such information.
1.   Documents Incorporated by Reference
     In the section “Documents Incorporated by Reference” commencing on page 58 of the
     Prospectus, a new item (g) will be added after item (f) with the following wording:
     “(g)       The press release of the Bank dated 13th February, 2014 entitled “Banco
     Espírito Santo Group Activity and Results in 2013 (unaudited financial information under
     IFRS as implemented in the European Union)” presenting the unaudited annual
     consolidated results for the year ended on 31st December, 2013, including:
     (i) balance sheet (page 46) and;
     (ii) income statement (page 47).
     Any information not listed in the cross reference list above but included in the document
     incorporated by reference in this Supplement is given for information purposes only and
     is not required by the relevant annexes of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 809/2004 of
     24 April 2004.”
2.   Recent Developments
     In the section “Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. and BES Group” commencing on page 136 of
     the Prospectus, at the end of the heading “11. Recent Developments” commencing on
     page 191 of the Prospectus, the following paragraphs will be added with the following
     wording:

     “On the 16 of December 2013, BES announced the conclusion of a USD 500 Million
     capital increase by its subsidiary, BES Angola. After this operation BES Angola’s main
     shareholders are: BES with a 55.71% stake, Portmill Investimentos e Telecomunicações,
     S.A., with a 24% stake and Geni Novas Tecnologias, S.A. with an 18% stake. This capital
     increase in BES Angola has a positive impact on BES’ Core Tier I ratio of c. 25 bp,
     considering RWA as of 30 September 2013.

     On the 14 of February 2014, BES announced the acquisition from ESFIL – Espírito Santo
     Financiére of a 44,81% stake in Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie for c. EUR 55mn.
     After this transaction BES holds directly and indirectly 87.5% of the share capital of
     Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie.

     On the 18 of February 2014, BES announced that it received a notification from
     Blackrock, Inc. regarding the acquisition of shares on the 13 of February 2014 which
     resulted in a change of interest in BES. After the operation Blackrock holds 205,593,787
     shares, corresponding to a 5.12% stake in BES share capital, effectively held according
     to a chain of controlled undertakings available for viewing in the CMVM website:
     http://web3.cmvm.pt/sdi2004/emitentes/docs/PQ48561.pdf”

3.   Taxation
In the section “Taxation” commencing on page 202 of the Prospectus, the wording under
the heading “Taxation in Portugal” will be entirely replaced by the following:
“Taxation in Portugal
The following is a summary of the material Portuguese tax consequences with respect
to the Notes. The summary does not purport to be a comprehensive description of all
the tax consequences that may be relevant to any particular Noteholder, including tax
considerations that arise from rules of general application or that are generally
assumed to be known to Noteholders. This discussion is based on Portuguese law as it
stands at the date of this Prospectus and is subject to any change in law that may take
effect after such date. Prospective investors in the Notes should consult their
professional advisers with respect to particular circumstances and the effects of state,
local or foreign laws to which they may be subject. Noteholders who are in doubt as to
their tax position should consult their professional advisers.
Economic benefits derived from interest, amortisation, reimbursement premiums and
other types of remuneration arising from the Notes are designated as investment income
for Portuguese tax purposes.
Notes issued by Bank acting through Cayman Islands branch or London branch or its
Luxembourg branch are subject to the following specific tax considerations:
Payments to be made by the Bank acting through Cayman Islands branch or London
branch or its Luxembourg branch of investment income (including interest) arising from
Notes issued by them and payable to an individual or legal person who is a non-resident
in Portuguese territory for tax purposes are not subject to Portuguese withholding tax
provided those payments correspond to costs or charges concerning the activities of that
branch. It should be taken into account that according with the legal provision dealing
with this matter the Secretary of State for Fiscal Affairs (currently Secretário de Estado
dos Assuntos Fiscais) has issued the Governmental Order no. 1132/2006-XVII, of 12th
September 2006, which has only entered into force in respect of Notes issued after 1st
January 2007, stating that, if the proceeds of the Notes issued by foreign financial
branches of Portuguese credit institutions are transferred to the respective headquarters
or to another branch of such Portuguese credit institutions, the investment income
(including interest) arising from such Notes and payable to Noteholders with no
residence, effective management or permanent establishment in Portugal will be
considered subject to a Portuguese final withholding tax at a rate of 25 per cent. (in case
of payments to non-resident legal persons) or 28 per cent. (in case of payments to non-
resident individuals) or 35 per cent. (if such payments are made to (i) residents in
blacklisted jurisdictions currently listed in Portaria 150/2004 of 13th February 2004, as
amended, or to (ii) accounts opened in the name of one or more accountholders acting on
behalf of one or more unidentified third parties the relevant beneficial owner(s) of the
income is/are identified), as the case may be, which may be reduced in accordance with
any applicable double taxation treaty signed by Portugal. In order to benefit from such
reduction Noteholders shall comply with certain procedures and certification
requirements of the Portuguese tax authorities, aimed at verifying the non-resident status
and eligibility for the respective tax treaty benefits (currently the form 21 RFI).
Notes issued by the Bank acting through its head office in Lisbon and through its
Madeira branch are subject to the following specific tax considerations:
General tax regime applicable to debt securities
Interest and other types of investment income obtained on Notes by a Portuguese resident
individual is subject to individual income tax. If the payment of interest or other
investment income is made available to Portuguese resident individuals, withholding tax
applies, as a rule, at a rate of 28 per cent., which is the final tax on that income unless the
individual elects to include such income in his taxable income, subject to tax at
progressive rates of up to 48 per cent. In the latter circumstance an additional income tax
will be due on the part of the taxable income exceeding €80,000 as follows: (i) 2.5 per
cent. on the part of the taxable income exceeding €80,000 up to €250,000 and (ii) 5 per
cent. on the remaining part (if any) of the taxable income exceeding €250,000. Also, if
the option of income aggregation is made an additional surcharge at the rate of 3.5 per
cent. will also be due over the amount that exceeds the annual amount of the monthly
minimum guaranteed wage.
Capital gains obtained by Portuguese resident individuals on the transfer of Notes are
taxed at a special tax rate of 28 per cent. levied on the positive difference between the
capital gains and capital losses arising from the transfer of securities and derivatives of
each year, unless the individual elects for aggregation to his taxable income, subject to
tax at the current progressive rates of up to 48 per cent.. In the latter circumstance an
additional income tax will be due on the part of the taxable income exceeding €80,000 as
follows: (i) 2.5 per cent. on the part of the taxable income exceeding €80,000 up to
€250,000 and (ii) 5 per cent. on the remaining part (if any) of the taxable income
exceeding €250,000. Also, if the option of income aggregation is made an additional
surcharge at the rate of 3.5 per cent. will also be due over the amount that exceeds the
annual amount of the monthly minimum guaranteed wage. Accrued interest does not
qualify as capital gains for tax purposes.
Interest and other investment income derived from Notes and capital gains obtained with
the transfer of Notes by legal persons resident for tax purposes in Portugal and by non-
resident legal persons with a permanent establishment in Portugal to which the income
or gains are attributable are included in their taxable income and are subject to a
corporate tax at a rate of (i) 23 per cent. or (ii) if the taxpayer is a small or medium
enterprise as established in Decree-Law no. 372/2007 of 6 November 2007, 17 per cent.
for taxable profits up to €15,000 and 23 per cent. on profits in excess thereof to which
may be added a municipal surcharge (derrama municipal) of up to 1.5 per cent. of its
taxable income. Corporate taxpayers with a taxable income of more than €1,500,000 are
also subject to State surcharge (derrama estadual) of (i) 3 per cent. on the part of its
taxable profits exceeding €1,500,000 up to €7,500,000, (ii) 5 per cent. on the part of the
taxable profits that exceeds €7,500,000 up to €35,000,000, and (iii) 7 per cent. on the
part of the taxable profits that exceeds €35,000,000.
As general rule, withholding tax at a rate of 25 per cent. applies on interest and other
investment income, which is deemed a payment on account of the final tax due.
Portuguese financial institutions, pension funds, retirement and/or education savings
funds, share savings funds, venture capital funds incorporated under the laws in Portugal
and some exempt entities are not subject to Portuguese withholding tax.
Investment income paid or made available to accounts opened in the name of one or more
accountholders acting on behalf of one or more unidentified third parties is subject to a
final withholding tax rate of 35 per cent., unless the relevant beneficial owner(s) of the
income is/are identified and as a consequence the tax rates applicable to such beneficial
owner(s) will apply.
Without prejudice to the special debt securities tax regime as described below, the
general tax regime on debt securities applicable to non-resident entities is the following:
As a rule, interest and other types of investment income obtained by non-resident legal
persons without a Portuguese permanent establishment to which the income is
attributable is subject to withholding tax at a rate of 25 per cent. which is the final tax on
that income.
Also, as a rule, interest payments on the Notes are subject to a final withholding tax at
the current rate of 28 per cent. whenever made to non-resident individual persons.
Investment income paid or made available to accounts opened in the name of one or more
accountholders acting on behalf of one or more unidentified third parties is subject to a
final withholding tax rate of 35 per cent., unless the relevant beneficial owner(s) of the
income is/are identified and as a consequence the tax rates applicable to such beneficial
owner(s) will apply.
A withholding tax rate of 35 per cent. applies in case of investment income payments to
individuals or companies domiciled in a “low tax jurisdictions” list approved by Portaria
no. 150/2004 of 13 February 2004, amended by Portaria 292/2011, of 8th November
2011.
Under the tax treaties entered into by Portugal which are in full force and effect on the
date of this Prospectus, the withholding tax rate may be reduced to 15 per cent., 12 per
cent., 10 per cent. or 5 per cent., depending on the applicable treaty and provided that the
relevant formalities (including certification of residence by the tax authorities of the
beneficial owners of the interest and other investment income) are met. The reduction
may apply at source or through the refund of the excess tax. The forms currently
applicable for these purposes may be available at www.portaldasfinancas.gov.pt.
Capital gains obtained on the transfer of Notes by non-resident individuals without a
permanent establishment in Portugal to which gains are attributable are exempt from
Portuguese capital gains taxation unless the individual is resident in a “low tax
jurisdictions” list approved by Portaria no. 150/2004 of 13 February 2004, amended by
Portaria 292/2011, 8th November 2011 (Lista dos países, territórios e regiões com
regimes de tributação privilegiada, claramente mais favoráveis). Capital gains obtained
by individuals that are not entitled to said exemption will be subject to taxation at a 28
per cent. flat rate. Under the tax treaties entered into by Portugal, such gains are usually
not subject to Portuguese corporate income tax, but the applicable rules should be
confirmed on a case by case basis. Accrued interest does not qualify as capital gains for
tax purposes.
Regarding capital gains obtained on the transfer of Notes by a legal person non-resident
in Portugal for tax purposes and without a permanent establishment in Portugal to which
gains are attributable are exempt from Portuguese capital gains taxation, unless the
share capital of the non-resident entity is more than 25 per cent. directly or indirectly
held by Portuguese resident entities or if the beneficial owner is resident in a “low tax
jurisdictions” list approved by Portaria no. 150/2004, of 13 February 2004, amended by
Portaria 292/2011, of 8th November 2011 (Lista dos países, territórios e regiões com
regimes de tributação privilegiada, claramente mais favoráveis). If the exemption does
not apply, the gains will be subject to corporate income tax at a rate of 25 per cent.
Under the tax treaties entered into by Portugal, such gains are usually not subject to
Portuguese corporate income tax, but the applicable rules should be confirmed on a case
by case basis.
Special debt securities tax regime
Pursuant to Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7 November 2005, as amended from time to time
("Decree-Law 193/2005"), investment income paid on, as well as capital gains derived
from a sale or other disposition of the Notes, to non-Portuguese resident Noteholders will
be exempt from Portuguese income tax provided the debt securities are integrated in (i) a
centralised system for securities managed by an entity resident for tax purposes in
Portugal, or (ii) an international clearing system operated by a managing entity
established in a member state of the EU other than Portugal (e.g. Euroclear or
Clearstream, Luxembourg) or in a European Economic Area Member State provided, in
this case, that such State is bound to cooperate with Portugal under an administrative
cooperation arrangement in tax matters similar to the exchange of information schemes
in relation to tax matters existing within the EU Member States or (iii) integrated in other
centralised systems not covered above provided that, in this last case, the Portuguese
Government authorises the application of the Decree-Law 193/2005, and the
beneficiaries are:
(i)     central banks or governmental agencies; or
(ii)    international bodies recognised by the Portuguese State; or
(iii)   entities resident in countries or jurisdictions with whom Portugal has a double tax
        treaty in force or a tax information exchange agreement; or
(iv)    other entities without headquarters, effective management or a permanent
        establishment in the Portuguese territory to which the relevant income is
        attributable and which are not domiciled in a blacklisted jurisdiction as set out in
        the Portaria no. 150/2004, as amended.
For purposes of application at source of this tax exemption regime, Decree-Law
193/2005 requires completion of certain procedures and the provision of certain
information. Under these procedures (which are aimed at verifying the non-resident
status of the Noteholder), the Noteholder is required to hold the Notes through an
account with one of the following entities:
(i)     a direct registered entity, which is the entity with which the debt securities
        accounts that are integrated in the centralised system are opened;
(ii)    an indirect registered entity, which, although not assuming the role of the "direct
        registered entities", is a client of the latter; or
(iii)   an international clearing system, which is an entity that proceeds, in the
        international market, to clear, settle or transfer securities which are integrated in
        centralised systems or in their own registration systems.


The following is a general description of the rules and procedures for the proof required
for the exemption to apply at source, as they stand as at the date of this Prospectus.
1.         Domestic Cleared Notes - held through a direct register entity
Direct register entities are required, for the purposes of Decree-Law 193/2005, to
register the Noteholders in one of two accounts: (i) an exempt account or (ii) a non-
exempt account.
Registration of the Notes in the exempt account is crucial for the exemption to apply. For
this purpose, the registration of the non-resident Noteholders in an exempt account,
allowing application of the exemption upfront, requires evidence of the non-resident
status, to be provided by the Noteholder to the direct register entity before or at the
Income Payment Date (as defined below), as follows:
(i)     if the Noteholder is a central bank, an international body recognised as such by the
        Portuguese State, or a public law entity and respective agencies, a declaration
        issued by the beneficial owner of the Notes itself duly signed and authenticated, or
        proof of non-residence pursuant to (iv) below. The respective proof of non-
        residence in Portugal is provided once, its periodical renewal not being necessary
        and the beneficial owner should inform the direct register entity immediately of any
        change in the requisite conditions that may prevent the tax exemption from
        applying;
(ii)    If the Noteholder is a credit institution, a financial company, a pension fund or an
        insurance company domiciled in any OECD country or in a country with which
        Portugal has entered into a double taxation treaty, certification shall be made by
        means of the following: (A) its tax identification official document; or (B) a
        certificate issued by the entity responsible for such supervision or registration, or
        by tax authorities, confirming the legal existence of the beneficial owner of the
        Notes and its domicile; or (C) proof of non-residence pursuant to (iv) below. The
        respective proof of non-residence in Portugal is provided once, its periodical
        renewal not being necessary and the beneficial owner should inform the direct
        register entity immediately of any change in the requisite conditions that may
        prevent the tax exemption from applying;
(iii)   if the Noteholder is an investment fund or other collective investment scheme
        domiciled in any OECD country or in a country with which the Portuguese
        Republic has entered into a double tax treaty in force or a tax information
        exchange agreement in force, it shall make proof of its non-resident status by
        providing any of the following documents: (a) a declaration issued by the entity
        responsible for its supervision or registration or by the relevant tax authority,
        confirming its legal existence, domicile and law of incorporation; or (b) proof of
        non-residence pursuant to the terms of paragraph (iv) below; The respective proof
        of non-residence in Portugal is provided once, its periodical renewal not being
        necessary and the beneficial owner should inform the direct register entity
        immediately of any change in the requisite conditions that may prevent the tax
        exemption from applying;
(iv)    other investors will be required to make proof of their non-resident status by way
        of: (a) a certificate of residence or equivalent document issued by the relevant tax
        authorities; (b) a document issued by the relevant Portuguese Consulate certifying
        residence abroad; or (c) a document specifically issued by an official entity which
        forms part of the public administration (either central, regional or peripheral,
        indirect or autonomous) of the relevant country. The Noteholder must provide an
        original or a certified copy of such documents and, as a rule, if such documents do
        not refer to a specific year and do not expire, they must have been issued within the
        three years prior to the relevant payment or maturity dates or, if issued after the
        relevant payment or maturity dates, within the following three months. The
        Beneficiary must inform the direct registering entity immediately of any change in
        the requirement conditions that may eliminate the tax exemption.
“Income Payment Date” means any date on which the Noteholders are entitled to
receive interest or other investment income, either in the form of accrued interest or
coupon.
2.         Internationally Cleared Notes - held through an entity managing an
international clearing system
Pursuant to the requirements set forth in the tax regime, if the Notes are registered in an
account held by an international clearing system operated by a managing entity, the
latter shall transmit, on each interest payment date and each relevant redemption date, to
the direct register entity or to its representative, and with respect to all accounts under its
management, the identification and quantity of securities, as well as the amount of
income, and, when applicable, the amount of tax withheld, segregated by the following
categories of beneficiaries:
(i)     Entities with residence, headquarters, effective management or permanent
        establishment to which the income would be imputable and which are non-exempt
        and subject to withholding;
(ii)    Entities which have residence in country, territory or region with a more
        favourable tax regime, included in the Portuguese "blacklist" (countries and
        territories listed in Portaria no. 150/2004, of 13 February 2004, as amended from
        time to time, the Portaria no. 150/2004) and which are non-exempt and subject to
        withholding;
(iii)   Entities with residence, headquarters, effective management or permanent
        establishment to which the income would be imputable, and which are exempt or
        not subject to withholding;
(iv)    Other entities which do not have residence, headquarters, effective management or
        permanent establishment to which the income generated by the securities would be
        imputable.
      On each interest payment date and each relevant redemption date, the following
      information with respect to the beneficiaries that fall within the categories mentioned in
      paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) above, should also be transmitted:
      (a)       Name and address;
      (b)       Tax identification number (if applicable);
      (c)       Identification and quantity of the securities held; and
      (d)       Amount of income generated by the securities.
      If the conditions for the exemption to apply are met, but, due to inaccurate or insufficient
      information, tax was withheld, a special refund procedure is available under the special
      regime approved by Decree-law 193/2005, as amended from time to time. The refund
      claim is to be submitted to the direct register entity of the Notes within 6 months from the
      date the withholding took place. A special tax form for these purposes, and for issuances
      as from 1 of January 2014 onwards, was approved by Order ("Despacho") no. 2937/2014
      (2nd series), published in the Portuguese official gazette, second series, n.º37, of 21
      February 2014 issued by the Secretary of State of Tax Affairs and may be available at
      www.portaldasfinancas.gov.pt.
      The refund of withholding tax after the above six-month period is to be claimed from the
      Portuguese tax authorities within two years, starting from the term of the year in which
      the withholding took place.
      The absence of evidence of non-residency in respect to any non-resident entity which
      benefits from the above mentioned tax exemption regime shall result in the loss of the tax
      exemption and consequent submission to the above applicable Portuguese general tax
      provisions.”

The tax forms annexed to the Prospectus starting on page 212 of the Prospectus have ceased to
apply further to the entry into force of Law 83-C/2013 of 31 December 2013 and are therefore
deleted in their entirety.Copies of this Supplement can be obtained from the registered office of
the Bank and of BES Finance and from the specified office of the Paying Agent for the time
being in Luxembourg. In addition, copies of this Supplement are available for viewing at the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s website (www.bourse.lu).

In accordance with article 13 paragraph 2 of Part II of the Prospectus Act, investors who, before
the publication of this Supplement, have already agreed to purchase or subscribe for any Notes
to be issued under the Programme, have the right, exercisable within a time limit of two
working days after the publication of this Supplement, meaning 26 February 2014, to withdraw
their acceptances.
Dated 24 February 2014
