PAGE 1
MiFID II Product Governance – Solely for the purposes of each manufacturer's product approval process,
the target market assessment in respect of the Notes has led to the conclusion that: (i) the target market for
the Notes is eligible counterparties and professional clients, each as defined in Directive 2014/65/EU (as
amended, "MiFID II") and (ii) all channels for distribution to eligible counterparties and professional clients
are appropriate. Any person subsequently offering, selling or recommending the Notes (a "distributor")
should take into consideration the manufacturers' target market assessment; however, a distributor subject
to MiFID II is responsible for undertaking its own target market assessment in respect of the Notes (by either
adopting or refining the manufacturers' target market assessment) and determining appropriate distribution
channels.

UK MIFIR product governance / Professional investors and Eligible Counterparties target market –
Solely for the purposes of each manufacturer’s product approval process, the target market assessment in
respect of the Notes has led to the conclusion that: (i) the target market for the Notes is only eligible
counterparties, as defined  in the FCA Handbook Conduct  of Business Sourcebook ("COBS") and
professional clients, as defined in Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of
the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 ("UK MiFIR"); and (ii) all channels for distribution of the Notes
are appropriate. Any person subsequently offering, selling or recommending the Notes (a "distributor")
should take into consideration the manufacturers’ target market assessment; however, a distributor subject
to the FCA Handbook Product Intervention and Product Governance Sourcebook (the "UK MiFIR Product
Governance Rules") is responsible for undertaking its own target market assessment in respect of the
Notes (by either adopting or refining the manufacturers’ target market assessment) and determining
appropriate distribution channels.

PROHIBITION OF SALES TO EEA RETAIL INVESTORS – The Notes are not intended to be offered, sold
or otherwise made available to and should not be offered, sold or otherwise made available to any retail
investor in the European Economic Area ("EEA"). For these purposes, a retail investor means a person who
is one (or more) of: (i) a retail client as defined in point (11) of Article 4(1) of MiFID II; (ii) a customer within
the meaning of Directive 2016/97/EU (as amended), where that customer would not qualify as a professional
client as defined in point (10) of Article 4(1) of MiFID II; or (iii) not a qualified investor as defined in Regulation
(EU) 2017/1129 (as amended, the "Prospectus Regulation"). Consequently no key information document
required by Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014 (as amended, the "PRIIPs Regulation") for offering or selling
the Notes or otherwise making them available to retail investors in the EEA has been prepared and therefore
offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available to any retail investor in the EEA may be
unlawful under the PRIIPs Regulation.

PROHIBITION OF SALES TO UK RETAIL INVESTORS – The Notes are not intended to be offered, sold
or otherwise made available to and should not be offered, sold or otherwise made available to any retail
investor in the United Kingdom ("UK"). For these purposes, a retail investor means a person who is one (or
more) of: (i) a retail client, as defined in point (8) of Article 2 of Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2017/565 as
it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 ("EUWA");  (ii) a
customer within the meaning of the provisions of the FSMA and any rules or regulations made under the
FSMA to implement Directive (EU) 2016/97, where that customer would not qualify as a professional client,
as defined in point (8) of Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 as it forms part of domestic law by
virtue of the EUWA; or (iii) not a qualified investor as defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 as it
forms part of domestic law by virtue of the EUWA. Consequently no key information document required by
Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014 as  it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the EUWA (the "UK PRIIPs
Regulation") for offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available to retail investors in the
UK has been prepared and therefore offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available to any
retail investor in the UK may be unlawful under the UK PRIIPs Regulation.

PAGE 2
                                            2




In case of Notes listed on the official list of and admitted to trading on the regulated market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
or publicly offered in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Final Terms of Notes will be displayed on the website of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu). In the case of Notes publicly offered in one or more member states of the
European Economic Area other than the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Final Terms will be displayed on the website of BASF
Group (www.BASF.com).



                                                                          March 6, 2023
                                                                                                   6. März 2023
                                  Final Terms
                         Endgültige Bedingungen

                                 BASF SE

              EUR 500,000,000 4.250 per cent. Notes due March 8, 2032
           EUR 500.000.000 4,250 % Schuldverschreibungen fällig 8. März 2032

                                   Series No.: 51 / Tranche No.: 1
                                   Serien Nr.: 51 / Tranche Nr.: 1

                                     Issue Date: March 8, 2023
                            Tag der Begebung: 8. März 2023

      issued pursuant to the EUR 20,000,000,000 Debt Issuance Program dated September 9, 2022
                                 of BASF SE and BASF Finance Europe N.V.
     begeben aufgrund des EUR 20.000.000.000 Debt Issuance Program vom 9. September 2022
                            der BASF SE und BASF Finance Europe N.V.

                                       Important Notice

These Final Terms have been prepared for the purpose of Article 8(5) in conjunction with Article 25(4) of the
Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 of the European Parliament and of the Council of June 14, 2017, as amended,
and must be read in conjunction with the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus pertaining to the Program dated
September 9, 2022 (the "Prospectus") and the supplement dated 27 February 2023. The Prospectus and
any supplement thereto are available for viewing in electronic form on the website of the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange (www.bourse.lu) and on the website of BASF Group (www.BASF.com) and copies may be
obtained from BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Germany. Full information is
only available on the basis of the combination of the Prospectus, any supplement and these Final Terms.

                                      Wichtiger Hinweis

Diese Endgültigen Bedingungen wurden für die Zwecke von Artikel 8 Abs. 5 i.V.m. Artikel 25 Abs. 4 der
Verordnung (EU) 2017/1129 des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates vom 14. Juni 2017, in der jeweils
geänderten Fassung, abgefasst und sind in Verbindung mit dem Debt Issuance Program Prospekt vom
9. September 2022 über das Programm (der "Prospekt") und dem Nachtrag dazu vom 27. Februar 2023
zu lesen. Der Prospekt sowie etwaige Nachträge können in elektronischer Form auf der Internetseite der
Luxemburger Börse (www.bourse.lu) und der Internetseite der BASF Gruppe (www.BASF.com) eingesehen
werden. Kopien sind erhältlich unter BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein,
Deutschland. Um sämtliche Angaben zu erhalten, sind die Endgültigen Bedingungen, der Prospekt und
etwaige Nachträge im Zusammenhang zu lesen.


                                Part I.: TERMS AND CONDITIONS
                                     Teil I.: ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN


This Part I. of the Final Terms is to be read in conjunction with the set of Terms and Conditions that apply
to Notes with fixed interest rates (the "Terms and Conditions") set forth in the Prospectus as Option I.
Capitalized terms shall have the meanings specified in the Terms and Conditions.

Dieser Teil I. der Endgültigen Bedingungen ist in Verbindung mit dem Satz der Anleihebedingungen, der auf
Schuldverschreibungen mit fester Verzinsung Anwendung findet (die "Anleihebedingungen"), zu lesen,
der als Option I im Prospekt enthalten ist. Begriffe, die in den Anleihebedingungen definiert sind, haben
dieselbe Bedeutung, wenn sie in diesen Endgültigen Bedingungen verwendet werden.

PAGE 3
                                            3




All references in this Part I. of the Final Terms to numbered paragraphs and subparagraphs are to
paragraphs and subparagraphs of the Terms and Conditions.

Bezugnahmen in diesem Teil I. der Endgültigen Bedingungen auf Paragraphen und Absätze beziehen sich
auf die Paragraphen und Absätze der Anleihebedingungen.

The blanks in the provisions of the Terms and Conditions, which are applicable to the Notes shall be deemed
to be completed by the information contained in the Final Terms as if such information were inserted in the
blanks of such provisions. All provisions in the Terms and Conditions corresponding to items in these Final
Terms which are either not selected or not completed or which are deleted shall be deemed to be deleted
from the Terms and Conditions applicable to the Notes (the "Conditions").

Die   Leerstellen   in  den   auf   die  Schuldverschreibungen  anwendbaren  Bestimmungen   der
Anleihebedingungen gelten als durch die in den Endgültigen Bedingungen enthaltenen Angaben ausgefüllt,
als ob die Leerstellen in den betreffenden Bestimmungen durch diese Angaben ausgefüllt wären. Sämtliche
Bestimmungen der Anleihebedingungen, die sich auf Variablen dieser Endgültigen Bedingungen beziehen,
die weder  angekreuzt noch  ausgefüllt  oder  die  gestrichen  werden,  gelten  als  in den  auf  die
Schuldverschreibungen anwendbaren Anleihebedingungen (die "Bedingungen") gestrichen.


CURRENCY, DENOMINATION, FORM, CERTAIN DEFINITIONS (§ 1)
WÄHRUNG, STÜCKELUNG, FORM, DEFINITIONEN (§ 1)

Currency and Denomination
Währung und Stückelung

   Specified Currency                                                             Euro (EUR)
   Festgelegte Währung                                                           Euro (EUR)

   Aggregate Principal Amount                                    EUR 500,000,000
   Gesamtnennbetrag                                         EUR 500.000.000

   Aggregate Principal Amount in words                          EUR five hundred million
   Gesamtnennbetrag in Worten                              EUR fünfhundert Millionen

   Specified Denomination                                         EUR 100,000
   Festgelegte Stückelung                                          EUR 100.000

 Permanent Global Note (TEFRA C and/or Notes kept in custody by or on behalf of CDS)
   Dauerglobalurkunde (TEFRA C und/oder Schuldverschreibungen, die von oder für CDS
   verwahrt werden)

 Temporary Global Note exchangeable for Permanent Global Note (TEFRA D)
   Vorläufige Globalurkunde austauschbar gegen Dauerglobalurkunde (TEFRA D)

Clearing System
Clearing System

 Clearstream Banking AG

 Clearstream Banking S.A.

 Euroclear Bank SA/NV

 CDS & Co., as nominee for CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc.
  CDS & Co., als Beauftragte für CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc.

Global Note
Globalurkunde

 Classical Global Note

 New Global Note


INTEREST (§ 3)
ZINSEN (§ 3)

 Fixed Rate Notes (Option I)
   Festverzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen (Option I)

PAGE 4
                                            4




  single Rate of Interest during term

       einheitlicher Zinssatz während der Laufzeit

      Rate of Interest                                                   4.250 per cent. per annum
      Zinssatz                                                               4,250 % per annum

                                                            March 8, 2023 to March 8, 2032
                                                                                 8. März 2023 bis 8. März 2032


   different Rates of Interest during term
      verschiedene Zinssätze während der Laufzeit

         from (and including)               to (but excluding)             per cent. per annum
        vom (einschließlich)             bis (ausschließlich)        % per annum

           [specified dates]              [specified dates]              [specified rates]
               [Daten]                      [Daten]                     [Zinssätze]

       Interest Commencement Date                                            March 8, 2023
      Verzinsungsbeginn                                                                        8. März 2023

      Fixed Interest Date(s)                                             March 8 of each year
       Festzinstermin(e)                                                                8. März in jedem Jahr

        First Interest Payment Date                                              March 8, 2024
       Erster Zinszahlungstag                                                                   8. März 2024

    Initial Broken Amount per Specified Denomination
      Anfänglicher Bruchteilzinsbetrag je festgelegter Stückelung

   Fixed Interest Date preceding the Maturity Date
       Festzinstermin, der dem Fälligkeitstag vorangeht

   Final Broken Amount per Specified Denomination
      Abschließender Bruchteilzinsbetrag je festgelegter Stückelung

 Floating Rate Notes (Option II)
   Variabel verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen (Option II)

   Interest Payment Dates
   Zinszahlungstage

       Interest Commencement Date
      Verzinsungsbeginn

   Specified Interest Payment Dates
      Festgelegte Zinszahlungstage

   Specified Interest Period(s)
      Festgelegte Zinsperiode(n)

   Business Day Convention
   Geschäftstagskonvention

   Modified Following Business Day Convention
      Modifizierte-Folgender-Geschäftstag-Konvention

   FRN Convention (specify period(s))
    FRN Konvention (Zeitraum angeben)

   Following Business Day Convention
      Folgender-Geschäftstag-Konvention

   Business Day
   Geschäftstag

   Relevant financial centre(s)
      Relevante(s) Finanzzentrum(en)

PAGE 5
                                            5




   TARGET
    TARGET

   Rate of Interest
   Zinssatz

   EURIBOR
     EURIBOR

   Margin
   Marge

   plus
      Plus

   minus
      Minus

Day Count Fraction
Zinstagequotient

 Actual/Actual (ICMA Rule 251)
   Actual/Actual (ICMA Regelung 251)

  annual interest payment (excluding the case of short or long coupons)
       jährliche Zinszahlung (ausschließlich des Falls von kurzen oder langen Kupons)

   annual interest payment (including the case of short coupons)
       jährliche Zinszahlung (einschließlich des Falls von kurzen Kupons)

   two or more constant interest periods within an interest year (including the case of short coupons)
      zwei oder mehr gleichbleibende Zinsperioden (einschließlich des Falls von kurzen Kupons)

   calculation period is longer than one reference period (long coupon)
      Zinsberechnungszeitraum ist länger als eine Bezugsperiode (langer Kupon)

   reference period
      Bezugsperiode

     Deemed Interest Payment Date
       Fiktiver Zinszahlungstag

 Actual/365 (Fixed)

 Actual/360

 30/360 or 360/360 or Bond Basis

 30E/360 or Eurobond Basis


PAYMENTS (§ 4)
ZAHLUNGEN (§ 4)

Payment Business Day
Zahlungstag

 Relevant financial centre(s)
   Relevante(s) Finanzzentrum(en)

 TARGET
  TARGET


REDEMPTION (§ 5)
RÜCKZAHLUNG (§ 5)

Redemption at Maturity
Rückzahlung bei Endfälligkeit

 Maturity Date                                                            March 8, 2032
    Fälligkeitstag                                                                                  8. März 2032

PAGE 6
                                            6




 Redemption Month
   Rückzahlungsmonat

Early Redemption
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung

Early Redemption for Reasons of a Change of Control                                      Yes
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung aufgrund eines Kontrollwechsels                                       Ja

Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer at Specified Call Redemption Amount(s)             Yes
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin zu festgelegtem(n) Wahlrückzahlungs-
betrag/-beträgen (Call)                                                                    Ja

 Specified Call Redemption Date(s)                         December 8, 2031 – March 7, 2032
   festgelegte Wahlrückzahlungstag(e) (Call)                            8. Dezember 2031 – 7. März 2032


 Specified Call Redemption Amount(s)                                Aggregate Principal Amount
   festgelegte Wahlrückzahlungsbetrag/-beträge (Call)                           Gesamtnennbetrag

Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer at Early Redemption Amount                      Yes
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin zum Vorzeitigen Rückzahlungsbetrag              Ja

Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer at Specified Call Redemption Amount               No
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin zu festgelegtem(n) Wahlrückzahlungsbetrag/-beträgen
(Call)                                                                                   Nein

 Interest payment date [number] years after the Interest Commencement Date
   and each Interest Payment Date thereafter
   Zinszahlungstag [Zahl] Jahre nach dem Verzinsungsbeginn und an jedem
   darauf folgenden Zinszahlungstag

Early Redemption at the Option of a Holder at Specified Put Redemption Amount(s)              No
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl des Gläubigers zu festgelegtem(n) Wahlrückzahlungs-
betrag/-beträgen (Put)                                                                     Nein

 Put Redemption Date(s)
   Wahlrückzahlungstag(e) (Put)

 Put Redemption Amount(s)
   Wahlrückzahlungsbetrag/-beträge (Put)

Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer for Inconvertibility, Non-transferability or Illiquidity      No
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin wegen Fehlender Konvertierbarkeit,              Nein
Fehlender Übertragbarkeit oder Illiquidität

Purchase; Early Redemption at the option of the Issuer for Reason of Minimal
Outstanding Amount                                                               Yes
Rückkauf; Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin bei
geringem ausstehendem Nennbetrag                                                        Ja

Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer upon publication of a Transaction Trigger Notice       No
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin nach Veröffentlichung einer
Transaktions-Mitteilung                                                                    Nein

    Trigger Call Redemption Amount
    Ereignis-Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag

    Transaction Trigger Event Period                        from [issue date] to [date end of period]
    Transaktionsauslösende Ereignisfrist
                               vom [Begebungstag] bis zum [Datum Ende des Zeitraums]

    Description of transaction in respect of which the Notes are issued for
    refinancing purposes or in relation to which the occurence of a
    Transaction Trigger Event shall give rise to the redemption right
    Beschreibung der Transaktion bezüglich derer die
    Schuldverschreibungen zu Finanzierungszwecken begeben wurden oder
     in Bezug auf die das Eintreten eines Transaktionsauslösenden

PAGE 7
                                            7




    Ereignisses das Kündigungsrecht auslöst

    Transaction Trigger Event
    Transaktionsauslösendes Ereignis

Early Redemption Amount
Vorzeitiger Rückzahlungsbetrag

  Higher of Final Redemption Amount and Present Value
    Rückzahlungsbetrag, oder falls höher, abgezinster Marktwert

    Comparable Benchmark Yield of corresponding                                  plus 0.300 per cent.
    Vergleichbare Benchmark Rendite der entsprechenden                            zuzüglich 0,300%

    euro denominated benchmark debt security of the Federal Republic of Germany
        Euro-Referenz-Anleihe der Bundesrepublik Deutschland

   UK government Sterling denominated benchmark debt security issued by HM Treasury
        durch HM Treasury begebenen Sterling-Referenzanleihe des Vereinigten Königreichs

    Swiss franc denominated benchmark federal bond of the Swiss Confederation
        Schweizer Franken-Referenz-Bundesanleihe der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft

    U.S. dollar denominated benchmark U.S. Treasury debt security
        Referenz-U.S. Staatsanleihe (US Treasury debt security) in U.S. Dollar


THE FISCAL AGENT,THE PAYING AGENT AND THE CALCULATION AGENT (§ 6)
DER FISCAL AGENT, DIE ZAHLSTELLE UND DIE BERECHNUNGSSTELLE (§ 6)

    Fiscal and Paying Agent                                     Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
    Fiscal Agent und Zahlstelle                                   Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft

   Calculation Agent                                                   NatWest Markets N.V.
   Berechnungsstelle                                                  NatWest Markets N.V.


AMENDMENT OF THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, HOLDERS' REPRESENTATIVE (§ 11)
ÄNDERUNG DER ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN, GEMEINSAMER VERTRETER (§ 11)

 Appointment of a Holders' Representative by resolution passed by Holders and not in the Terms and
   Conditions
   Bestellung eines gemeinsamen Vertreters der Gläubiger durch Beschluss der Gläubiger und nicht in
   den Anleihebedingungen

 Appointment of a Holders' Representative in the Terms and Conditions
   Bestellung eines gemeinsamen Vertreters der Gläubiger in den Anleihebedingungen

  Name and address of the Holders' Representative
  Name und Anschrift des gemeinsamen Vertreters


NOTICES (§ 13)
MITTEILUNGEN (§ 13)

Place and medium of publication
Ort und Medium der Bekanntmachung

 Website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu)
    Internetseite der Luxemburger Wertpapierbörse (www.bourse.lu)

 Clearing System
   Clearing System

LANGUAGE OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS (§ 15)
SPRACHEDERANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN(§ 15)

 German and English (German controlling)
   Deutsch und Englisch (deutscher Text maßgeblich)

 English and German (English controlling)
   Englisch und Deutsch (englischer Text maßgeblich)

PAGE 8
                                            8




 English only
   Ausschließlich Englisch

 German only
   Ausschließlich Deutsch


                               Part II.: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
                                 Teil II.: ZUSÄTZLICHE INFORMATIONEN

A. Essential information
   Grundlegende Angaben

Interests of Natural and Legal Persons involved in the Issue/Offer
Interessen von Seiten natürlicher und juristischer Personen,
die an der Emission/dem Angebot beteiligt sind

 So far as the Issuer
    is aware, no person involved in the offer of the Notes has an
    interest material to the offer, except that certain Dealers and their
    affiliates may be customers of, and borrowers from the Issuer and
    its affiliates. In addition, certain Dealers and their affiliates have
   engaged, and may in the future engage, in investment banking and/or
   commercial banking transactions with, and may perform services for
   the Issuer and its affiliates in the ordinary course of business.
   Nach Kenntnis der Emittentin bestehen bei den an der Emission
    beteiligten Personen keine Interessen, die für das Angebot
   bedeutsam sind, außer, dass bestimmte Platzeure und mit ihnen
   verbundene Unternehmen Kunden von und Kreditnehmer der
   Emittentin und mit ihr verbundener Unternehmen sein können.
   Außerdem sind bestimmte Platzeure an Investment Banking-
   Transaktionen und/oder Commercial Banking-Transaktionen mit
   der Emittentin beteiligt, oder könnten sich in Zukunft daran beteiligen,
   und könnten im gewöhnlichen Geschäftsverkehr Dienstleistungen
    für die Emittentin und mit ihr verbundene Unternehmen erbringen.

 Other interest (specify)
   Andere Interessen (angeben)

Reasons for the offer and use of proceeds
Gründe für das Angebot und Verwendung der Erträge

   Reasons for the offer to the public or for the admission to trading
   Gründe für das öffentliche Angebot oder die Zulassung zum Handel

   Use of proceeds                                                   General corporate purposes
   Zweckbestimmung der Erlöse                                   Allgemeine Unternehmenszwecke

   Estimated net proceeds                                       EUR 498,095,000
   Geschätzter Nettobetrag der Erlöse                               EUR 498.095.000

   Estimated total expenses of the issue
   Geschätzte Gesamtkosten der Emission

B. Information concerning the securities to be offered /admitted to trading
   Informationen über die anzubietenden bzw. zum Handel zuzulassenden Wertpapiere

Securities Identification Numbers
Wertpapier-Kenn-Nummern

  Common Code                                                             259541859
  Common Code                                                             259541859

    International Security Identification Number (ISIN)                             XS2595418596
   Internationale Wertpapier-Identifikationsummer (ISIN)                          XS2595418596

  German Securities Code                                                    A351K7
   Wertpapier-Kenn-Nummer (WKN)                                              A351K7