PROSPECTUS
                                              Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                        (Incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                            (acting through its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch
                                      or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch)
                                                                                  and
                                                                                                                                                                             A4.5.1.1
                                                           BES Finance Ltd.
                                      (Incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands)
                                                unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by

                                                       Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                               (Incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                                                     (acting through its London branch)
                             €20,000,000,000 EURO MEDIUM TERM NOTE PROGRAMME
This Prospectus supersedes the Prospectus dated 18th December, 2009 and any previous Prospectus or offering circular or supplements thereto and is valid for
the purpose of the listing of Notes on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange, for a period of one year from the date of publication. Any Notes (as defined below) issued
under the Programme on or after the date of this Prospectus are issued subject to the provisions herein. This Prospectus does not affect any Notes already issued.
Under the €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme (the “Programme”), each of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the “Bank” or “BES”), acting through
its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch, and BES Finance Ltd. (“BES Finance” and, together
with the Bank in its capacity as an issuer of Notes under the Programme, the “Issuers” and each an “Issuer”) may from time to time and, subject to applicable laws
and regulations, issue notes (the “Notes”, which will include Senior Notes, Dated Subordinated Notes, Undated Subordinated Notes and, in the case of the Bank
acting through its head office only, Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes (as such terms are defined below)) denominated in any currency agreed between the Issuer
of such Notes (the “relevant Issuer”) and the relevant Dealer (as defined below).
The payments of all amounts owing in respect of the Notes issued by BES Finance will be unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by the Bank, acting through
its London branch, pursuant to the Trust Deed (as defined herein).
The Final Terms (as defined below) for each Tranche (as defined on page 77 below) of Notes will state whether the Notes of such Tranche are to be (i) senior Notes
which, in the case of Notes issued by BES Finance, will be guaranteed on an unsubordinated basis (“Senior Notes”), (ii) dated subordinated Notes which, in the
case of Notes issued by BES Finance, will be guaranteed on a subordinated basis (“Dated Subordinated Notes”), (iii) undated subordinated Notes which, in the
case of Notes issued by BES Finance, will be guaranteed on a subordinated basis (“Undated Subordinated Notes”) or (iv) undated deeply subordinated Notes
(“Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes”), which may be issued by the Bank acting through its head office only.
The maximum aggregate nominal amount of all Notes from time to time outstanding under the Programme will not exceed €20,000,000,000 or such greater amount
as may be agreed from time to time in accordance with the terms of the Programme Agreement (or its equivalent in other currencies calculated as described herein).
The Notes may be issued on a continuing basis to one or more of the Dealers specified on pages 5 and 6 and any additional Dealer appointed under the Programme
from time to time, which appointment may be for a specific issue or on an ongoing basis (each a “Dealer” and together the “Dealers”). References in this Prospectus
to the “relevant Dealer” shall, in the case of an issue of Notes being (or intended to be) subscribed by more than one Dealer, be to all Dealers agreeing to purchase
such Notes.
An investment in Notes issued under the Programme involves certain risks. For a discussion of these risks see “Risk Factors”.
Application has been made to the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier (the “CSSF”) in its capacity as competent authority under the Luxembourg
Act dated 10th July, 2005 on prospectuses for securities to approve this document as a base prospectus. Application has also been made to the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange for Notes issued under the Programme to be admitted to trading on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s regulated market and to be listed on the Official
List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. Notice of the aggregate nominal amount of Notes, interest (if any) payable in respect of Notes, the issue price of Notes
and any other terms and conditions not contained herein which are applicable to each Tranche of Notes will be set forth in the final terms (the “Final Terms”)
which, with respect to Notes to be listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange, will be filed with the CSSF.
The Programme provides that Notes may be listed or admitted to trading, as the case may be, on such other or further stock exchanges or markets as may be agreed
between the relevant Issuer, and the relevant Dealer. Each Issuer may also issue unlisted Notes.
In the case of Notes held through Interbolsa-Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa’’)
(each an “Interbolsa Note’’) the Notes of each Tranche will be in book-entry form (forma escritural) and can be either registered Notes (nominativas) or bearer
Notes (ao portador), as specified in the applicable Final Terms. The Notes of each Tranche (other than Interbolsa Notes) will be in bearer form. Bearer Notes other
than Interbolsa Notes will (unless otherwise specified in the applicable Final Terms) initially be represented by a temporary global Note, which may be in new
global note form, which will be exchangeable either for interests in a permanent global Note or for definitive Notes, as indicated in the applicable Final Terms, all
as further described in “Form of the Notes” below.
The relevant Issuer, the Bank, acting through its London branch, (where the relevant Issuer is BES Finance) and (in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes)
the Trustee may agree with any Dealer that Notes may be issued in a form not contemplated by the Terms and Conditions of the Notes herein, in which event a
supplement to this Prospectus, if appropriate, will be made available which will describe the effect of the agreement reached in relation to such Notes.
Any person (an “Investor”) intending to acquire or acquiring any securities from any person (an “Offeror”) should be aware that, in the context of an offer to the public
as defined in the Prospectus Directive, the relevant Issuer may be responsible to the Investor for the Prospectus only if the relevant Issuer has authorised that Offeror
to make the offer to the Investor. Each Investor should therefore verify with the Offeror whether or not the Offeror is acting in association with the relevant Issuer. If
the Offeror is not authorised by the relevant Issuer, the Investor should check with the Offeror whether anyone is responsible for the Prospectus for the purposes of
Article 6 of the Prospectus Directive as implemented by the national legislation of each EEA Member State in the context of the offer to the public, and, if so, who
that person is. If the Investor is in any doubt about whether it can rely on the Prospectus and/or who is responsible for its contents it should take legal advice.
                                                                             Arranger
                                                                              HSBC
                                                                             Dealers
BANCA IMI                                                                                                  BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO
BARCLAYS CAPITAL                                                                                                     BNP PARIBAS
BofA MERRILL LYNCH                                                                                                           CITI
COMMERZBANK                                                                                                  CRÉDIT AGRICOLE CIB
CREDIT SUISSE                                                                                                    DEUTSCHE BANK
GOLDMAN SACHS INTERNATIONAL                                                                                                HSBC
J.P. MORGAN                                                                                    LANDESBANK BADEN - WüRTTEMBERG
MITSUBISHI UFJ SECURITIES INTERNATIONAL PLC                                                                     MORGAN STANLEY
NOMURA INTERNATIONAL                                                           SOCIÉTÉ GÉNÉRALE CORPORATE & INVESTMENT BANKING
THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND                                                                                 UBS INVESTMENT BANK
UNICREDIT BANK
                                              The date of this Prospectus is 3rd November, 2010.
This Prospectus comprises a base prospectus for the purposes of Article 5.4 of Directive 2003/71/EC
(the “Prospectus Directive”).

                                  RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT                                                  A4.1.1
                                                                                                            A4.1.2
Each of BES Finance and the Bank accepts responsibility for the information contained in this               A5.1.1
Prospectus. To the best of the knowledge of BES Finance and the Bank (each having taken all                 A5.1.2
                                                                                                            A11.1.1
reasonable care to ensure that such is the case), the information contained in this Prospectus is in
                                                                                                            A11.1.2
accordance with the facts and does not omit anything likely to affect the import of such information.       A12.1.1
                                                                                                            A12.1.2
Subject as provided in the applicable Final Terms, the only persons authorised to use this Prospectus
in connection with an offer of Notes are the persons named in the applicable Final Terms as the
relevant Dealer or the Managers and the persons (if any) named in or identifiable in accordance with
the applicable Final Terms as an Authorised Offeror, as the case may be.

AN INVESTOR INTENDING TO ACQUIRE OR ACQUIRING ANY NOTES FROM AN OFFEROR
WILL DO SO, AND OFFERS AND SALES OF THE NOTES TO AN INVESTOR BY AN OFFEROR
WILL BE MADE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ANY TERMS AND OTHER ARRANGEMENTS IN
PLACE BETWEEN SUCH OFFEROR AND SUCH INVESTOR INCLUDING AS TO PRICE,
ALLOCATION AND SETTLEMENT ARRANGEMENTS. THE ISSUER WILL NOT BE A PARTY
TO ANY SUCH ARRANGEMENTS WITH INVESTORS (OTHER THAN THE DEALERS) IN
CONNECTION WITH THE OFFER OR SALE OF THE NOTES AND, ACCORDINGLY, THIS
PROSPECTUS AND ANY FINAL TERMS WILL NOT CONTAIN SUCH INFORMATION. THE
INVESTOR MUST LOOK TO THE OFFEROR AT THE TIME OF SUCH OFFER FOR THE
PROVISION OF SUCH INFORMATION. THE ISSUER HAS NO RESPONSIBILITY TO AN
INVESTOR IN RESPECT OF SUCH INFORMATION.

This Prospectus is to be read in conjunction with all documents which are deemed to be incorporated
herein by reference (see “Documents Incorporated by Reference” below). This Prospectus shall be
read and construed on the basis that such documents are incorporated and form part of this
Prospectus.

Neither the Dealers nor the Trustee have separately verified the information contained herein.
Accordingly, no representation, warranty or undertaking, express or implied, is made and no
responsibility or liability is accepted by the Dealers or the Trustee as to the accuracy or completeness
of the information contained in this Prospectus or any other information provided by BES Finance or
the Bank in connection with the Programme or the Notes or their distribution. The statements made
in this paragraph are made without prejudice to the responsibility of BES Finance and the Bank under
the Programme.

No person is or has been authorised to give any information or to make any representation not
contained in or not consistent with this Prospectus or any other information supplied in connection
with the Programme or the Notes and, if given or made, such information or representation must not
be relied upon as having been authorised by BES Finance, the Bank, the Trustee or any of the Dealers.

Neither this Prospectus nor any other information supplied in connection with the Programme or any
Notes (i) is intended to provide the basis of any credit or other evaluation or (ii) should be considered
as a recommendation or constituting an invitation or offer by BES Finance, the Bank, the Trustee or
any of the Dealers that any recipient of this Prospectus or any other information supplied in
connection with the Programme or any Notes should purchase any Notes. Each investor contemplating
purchasing any Notes should make its own independent investigation of the financial condition and
affairs, and its own appraisal of the creditworthiness, of BES Finance and/or the Bank.

The delivery of this Prospectus does not at any time imply that the information contained herein
concerning BES Finance and/or the Bank is correct at any time subsequent to the date hereof or that
any other information supplied in connection with the Programme is correct as of any time subsequent
to the date indicated in the document containing the same. The Dealers and the Trustee expressly do



                                                   2
not undertake to review the financial condition or affairs of BES Finance or the Bank during the life
of the Programme.

This Prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any Notes in
any jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make the offer or solicitation in such
jurisdiction. The distribution of this Prospectus and the offer or sale of Notes may be restricted by law
in certain jurisdictions. BES Finance, the Bank, the Trustee and the Dealers do not represent that this
document may be lawfully distributed, or that any Notes may be lawfully offered, in compliance with
any applicable registration or other requirements in any such jurisdiction, or pursuant to an
exemption available thereunder, or assume any responsibility for facilitating any such distribution or
offering. In particular, unless specifically indicated to the contrary in the applicable Fund Terms, no
action has been taken by BES Finance, the Bank, the Trustee or the Dealers which is intended to
permit a public offering of any Notes outside Luxembourg or distribution of this document in any
jurisdiction where action for that purpose is required. Accordingly, no Notes may be offered or sold,
directly or indirectly, and neither this Prospectus nor any advertisement or other offering material
may be distributed or published in any jurisdiction, except under circumstances that will result in
compliance with any applicable laws and regulations and the Dealers have represented that all offers
and sales by them will be made on the same terms. Persons into whose possession this Prospectus or
any Notes come must inform themselves about, and observe, any such restrictions. In particular, there
are restrictions on the distribution of this Prospectus and the offer or sale of Notes in the United States,
the European Economic Area (including the United Kingdom and Portugal), Japan and the Cayman
Islands (see “Subscription and Sale” below).

This Prospectus has been prepared on the basis that, except to the extent sub- paragraph (ii) below
may apply, any offer of Notes in any Member State of the European Economic Area which has
implemented the Prospectus Directive (each, a Relevant Member State) will be made pursuant to an
exemption under the Prospectus Directive, as implemented in that Relevant Member State, from the
requirement to publish a prospectus for offers of Notes. Accordingly any person making or intending
to make an offer in that Relevant Member State of Notes which are the subject of an offering
contemplated in this Prospectus as completed by final terms in relation to the offer of those Notes may
only do so (i) in circumstances in which no obligation arises for the Issuers or any Dealer to publish a
prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive or supplement a prospectus pursuant to
Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive, in each case, in relation to such offer, or (ii) if a prospectus for
such offer has been approved by the competent authority in that Relevant Member State or, where
appropriate, approved in another Relevant Member State and notified to the competent authority in
that Relevant Member State and (in either case) published, all in accordance with the Prospectus
Directive, provided that any such prospectus has subsequently been completed by applicable Final
Terms which specify that offers may be made other than pursuant to Article 3(2) of the Prospectus
Directive in that Relevant Member State and such offer is made in the period beginning and ending
on the dates specified for such purpose in such prospectus or applicable Final Terms, as applicable.
Except to the extent sub-paragraph (ii) above may apply, neither Issuer nor any Dealer has
authorised, nor do they authorise, the making of any offer of Notes in circumstances in which an
obligation arises for the Issuers or any Dealer to publish or supplement a prospectus for such offer.

The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the United States Securities Act 1933, as
amended (the “Securities Act”), and are subject to U.S. tax law requirements. Subject to certain
exceptions, Notes may not be offered, sold or delivered within the United States or to U.S. persons (see
“Subscription and Sale” below).

All references in this document to “U.S. dollars” and “U.S.$” refer to United States dollars, those to
“Sterling”, and “£” refer to pounds sterling, and those to “Euro”, “EUR” and “€” refer to the
currency introduced at the start of the third stage of European economic and monetary union
pursuant to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, as amended.

No invitation may be made to the public in the Cayman Islands to subscribe for the Notes.




                                                     3
                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                  Page
Summary                                                                                              5

Risk Factors                                                                                        15

General Description of the Programme                                                                36

Documents Incorporated by Reference                                                                 37

Form of the Notes                                                                                   39

Applicable Final Terms                                                                              42

Applicable Final Terms                                                                              60

Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)                    76

Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes                                      170

Use of Proceeds                                                                                    202

BES Finance Ltd.                                                                                   203

Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. and BES Group                                                           208

Taxation                                                                                           261

Subscription and Sale                                                                              277

General Information                                                                                281

In connection with the issue of any Tranche of Notes, the Dealer or Dealers (if any) named as the
Stabilising Manager(s) (or persons acting on behalf of any Stabilising Manager(s)) in the applicable
Final Terms may over-allot Notes or effect transactions with a view to supporting the market price of
the Notes at a level higher than that which might otherwise prevail. However, there is no assurance
that the Stabilising Manager(s) (or persons acting on behalf of a Stabilising Manager) will undertake
stabilisation action. Any stabilisation action may begin on or after the date on which adequate public
disclosure of the terms of the offer of the relevant Tranche of Notes is made and, if begun, may be
ended at any time, but it must end no later than the earlier of 30 days after the issue date of the
relevant Tranche of Notes and 60 days after the date of the allotment of the relevant Tranche of Notes.
Any stabilisation action or over-allotment must be conducted by the relevant Stabilising Manager(s)
(or persons acting on behalf of any Stabilising Manager(s)) in accordance with all applicable laws and
rules.




                                                  4
                                           SUMMARY
This summary must be read as an introduction to this Prospectus and any decision to invest in any
Notes should be based on a consideration of this Prospectus as a whole, including the documents
incorporated by reference. Following the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Prospectus
Directive in each Member State of the European Economic Area no civil liability will attach to the
Responsible Persons in any such Member State in respect of this Summary, including any translation
hereof, unless it is misleading, inaccurate or inconsistent when read together with the other parts of
this Prospectus. Where a claim relating to information contained in this Prospectus is brought before
a court in a Member State of the European Economic Area, the plaintiff may, under the national
legislation of the Member State where the claim is brought, be required to bear the costs of translating
the Prospectus before the legal proceedings are initiated.

Words and expressions defined in “Form of the Notes” and “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than
Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” and “Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated
Notes” (together the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes”) shall have the same meanings in this summary.

Issuers:                               BES Finance Ltd., a Cayman Islands incorporated finance
                                       subsidiary of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.

                                       Banco Espírito Santo, S.A., a Portuguese incorporated bank.

                                       In acting as an Issuer in relation to an issue of Notes, the Bank may
                                       specify that for the purpose of such issue it is acting through its head
                                       office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch or its Cayman Islands
                                       branch or its London branch.

                                       BES Finance Ltd. may not issue Undated Deeply Subordinated
                                       Notes.

                                       The Bank may issue Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes through
                                       its head office only.

Guarantor:                             Banco Espírito Santo, S.A., a Portuguese incorporated bank.
                                       In acting as a Guarantor in relation to an issue of Notes by BES
                                       Finance, the Bank will be acting through its London branch.

Risk Factors:                          There are certain factors that may affect the Issuer’s ability to fulfil
                                       its obligations under Notes issued under the Programme. These are
                                       set out under “Risk Factors” below. There are also certain factors
                                       that may affect the Guarantor’s ability to fulfil its obligations under
                                       the Guarantee. These are also set out under “Risk Factors” below. In
                                       addition, there are certain factors which are material for the purpose
                                       of assessing the market risks associated with Notes issued under the
                                       Programme, see “Risk Factors”.

Description:                          Euro Medium Term Note Programme

Arranger:                             HSBC Bank plc

Dealers:                              Banca IMI S.p.A.
                                      Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                      Barclays Bank PLC
                                      BNP Paribas
                                      Citigroup Global Markets Limited
                                      Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft
                                      Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank
                                      Credit Suisse Securities (Europe) Limited


                                                    5
                                     Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch
                                     Goldman Sachs International
                                     HSBC Bank plc
                                     J.P. Morgan Securities Ltd.
                                     Landesbank Baden-Württemberg
                                     Merrill Lynch International
                                     Mitsubishi UFJ Securities International plc
                                     Morgan Stanley & Co. International plc
                                     Nomura International plc
                                     Société Générale
                                     The Royal Bank of Scotland plc
                                     UBS Limited
                                     UniCredit Bank AG

                                     and any other Dealers appointed in accordance with the
                                     Programme.

Certain Restrictions:                Each issue of Notes denominated in a currency in respect of which
                                     particular laws, guidelines, regulations, restrictions or reporting
                                     requirements apply will only be issued in circumstances which
                                     comply with such laws, guidelines, regulations, restrictions or
                                     reporting requirements from time to time (see “Subscription and
                                     Sale” on page 277).

Notes having a maturity of less      Notes issued by BES Finance which have a maturity of less than
than one year:                       one year will constitute deposits for the purposes of the prohibition
                                     on accepting deposits contained in section 19 of the Financial
                                     Services and Markets Act 2000 unless they are issued to a limited
                                     class of professional investors and have a denomination of at least
                                     £100,000 or its equivalent in other currencies.

Trustee:                             The Bank of New York Mellon

Issuing and Principal Paying Agent: The Bank of New York Mellon, or, in the case of Interbolsa Notes,
                                    the Portuguese Paying Agent

Portuguese Paying Agent:             Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.

Size:                                Up to €20,000,000,000 (or its equivalent in other currencies
                                     calculated as described on page 36) outstanding at any time. The
                                     Issuers may increase the amount of the Programme in accordance
                                     with the terms of the Programme Agreement (following the
                                     production of a supplement to the Prospectus by the Issuers) and
                                     any further or other documents required by the relevant Stock
                                     Exchange for the purpose of listing any Notes to be issued on the
                                     relevant Stock Exchange.

Distribution:                        Notes may be distributed by way of private or public placement and
                                     in each case on a syndicated or non-syndicated basis.

Currencies:                          Subject to any applicable legal or regulatory restrictions, such
                                     currencies as may be agreed between the relevant Issuer and the
                                     relevant Dealer.

Redenomination:                      The applicable Final Terms may provide that certain Notes may be
                                     redenominated in euro. The relevant provisions applicable to any
                                     such redenomination are contained in the relevant Terms and
                                     Conditions of the Notes.


                                                  6
Maturities:            Such maturities as may be agreed between the relevant Issuer and
                       the relevant Dealer, subject to such minimum or maximum
                       maturities as may be allowed or required from time to time by the
                       relevant central bank (or equivalent body) or any laws or regulations
                       applicable to the relevant Issuer and the Bank (where the Issuer is
                       BES Finance) or the relevant Specified Currency, provided that
                       Dated Subordinated Notes will have a minimum maturity of five
                       years and Undated Subordinated Notes and Undated Deeply
                       Subordinated Notes will have no fixed maturity.

Issue Price:           Notes may be issued on a fully-paid or a partly-paid basis and at an
                       issue price which is at par or at a discount to, or premium over, par.
                       Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes may not be issued on a
                       partly-paid basis.

Form of Notes:         The Notes (other than Interbolsa Notes) will be in bearer form and
                       each Tranche will on issue be represented by a temporary global
                       Note which will be exchangeable either for interests in a permanent
                       global Note or for definitive Notes as indicated in the applicable
                       Final Terms. Permanent global Notes will be exchangeable for
                       definitive Notes upon either (i) not less than 60 days’ written notice
                       from Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V. (“Euroclear”) and/or Clearstream
                       Banking, société anonyme (“Clearstream, Luxembourg”) (acting on
                       the instructions of any holder of an interest in such permanent
                       global Note) to the Agent as described therein or (ii) only upon the
                       occurrence of an Exchange Event as described under “Form of the
                       Notes”. A global Note representing Notes having denominations
                       consisting of a minimum Specified Denomination and one or more
                       higher Specified Denominations which are not an integral multiple
                       of such minimum Specified Denomination may only be exchanged
                       for definitive Notes upon an Exchange Event. Any interest in a
                       global Note will be transferable only in accordance with the rules
                       and procedures for the time being of Euroclear, Clearstream,
                       Luxembourg and/or any other agreed clearing system, as
                       appropriate.

                       Interbolsa Notes will be issued in book-entry form (forma
                       escritural) and can be either registered Notes (nominativas) or
                       bearer Notes (ao portador), as specified in the applicable Final
                       Terms and as further described under “Form of the Notes”.
                       Interbolsa Notes may only be transferred in accordance with the
                       applicable procedures established by the Portuguese Securities
                       Code and the regulations issued by the Comissão do Mercado de
                       Valores Mobiliários (Portuguese Securities Market Commission,
                       the “CMVM”) and Interbolsa.

Fixed Rate Notes:      Fixed interest will be payable on such date or dates as may be
                       agreed between the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer and on
                       redemption and will be calculated on the basis of such Day Count
                       Fraction as may be agreed between the relevant Issuer and the
                       relevant Dealer.

Floating Rate Notes:   Floating Rate Notes will bear interest at a rate determined:

                       (i)   on the same basis as the floating rate under a notional interest-
                             rate swap transaction in the relevant Specified Currency
                             governed by an agreement incorporating the 2006 ISDA


                                    7
                                       Definitions (as published by the International Swaps and
                                       Derivatives Association, Inc., and as amended and updated as
                                       at the Issue Date of the first Tranche of the Notes of the
                                       relevant Series); or

                                  (ii) on the basis of a reference rate appearing on the agreed screen
                                       page of a commercial quotation service; or

                                  (iii) on such other basis as may be agreed between the relevant
                                        Issuer and the relevant Dealer,

                                  in each case as indicated in the applicable Final Terms.

                                  The Margin (if any) relating to such floating rate will be agreed
                                  between the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer for each Series
                                  of Floating Rate Notes.

Index Linked Notes:               Payments of principal in respect of Index Linked Redemption Notes
                                  or of interest in respect of Index Linked Interest Notes will be
                                  calculated by reference to such index and/or formula or to changes
                                  in the prices of securities or commodities or to such other factors as
                                  the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer may agree (as indicated
                                  in the applicable Final Terms).

Other provisions in relation to   Floating Rate Notes and Index Linked Interest Notes may also have
Floating Rate Notes and Index     a maximum interest rate, a minimum interest rate or both. Interest
Linked Interest Notes:            on Floating Rate Notes and Index Linked Interest Notes in respect
                                  of each Interest Period, as agreed prior to issue by the relevant
                                  Issuer and the relevant Dealer, will be payable on such Interest
                                  Payment Dates, and will be calculated on the basis of such Day
                                  Count Fraction, as may be agreed between the relevant Issuer and
                                  the relevant Dealer.

Dual Currency Notes:              Payments (whether in respect of principal or interest and whether at
                                  maturity or otherwise) in respect of Dual Currency Notes will be
                                  made in such currencies, and based on such rates of exchange, as
                                  the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer may agree (as indicated
                                  in the applicable Final Terms). Interbolsa Notes may be Dual
                                  Currency Notes provided the corresponding information necessary
                                  for that purpose is made available by the Issuer or by the Portuguese
                                  Paying Agent to Interbolsa, pursuant to the applicable Interbolsa
                                  procedures.

Zero Coupon Notes:                Zero Coupon Notes will be offered and sold at a discount to their
                                  nominal amount and will not bear interest.

Credit Linked Notes:              Amounts payable in respect of the Credit Linked Notes will be
                                  determined on the basis of whether one or more specified credit
                                  events occur in relation to a specified entity or entities.

                                  Following the occurrence of such events, if Conditions to
                                  Settlement are satisfied, the Credit Linked Notes will be redeemed,
                                  and the relevant Issuer will, if Cash Settlement is specified as the
                                  applicable Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms, pay the
                                  Credit Event Redemption Amount or, if Physical Delivery is
                                  specified as the applicable Settlement Method in the applicable
                                  Final Terms, Deliver the Deliverable Obligations comprising the
                                  Asset Amount.


                                               8
                         Where Auction Settlement is specified as the applicable Settlement
                         Method in the applicable Final Terms and an Auction Final Price
                         Determination Date occurs, the Auction Final Price will be
                         determined according to an auction procedure set out in the
                         applicable rules published by ISDA on its website at www.isda.org
                         (or any successor website thereto) from time to time and may be
                         amended from time to time.

                         If Auction Settlement is specified as the applicable Settlement
                         Method in the applicable Final Terms and a Credit Event
                         Determination Date occurs, the Credit Linked Notes will be
                         redeemed and the relevant Issuer will pay the Credit Event
                         Redemption Amount.

                         Prospective investors should review the “Terms and Conditions of
                         the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” below
                         and the applicable Final Terms to ascertain whether and how such
                         provisions apply to the Credit Linked Notes.

Redemption:              The Final Terms relating to each Tranche of Notes will indicate
                         either that the Notes of such Tranche cannot be redeemed prior to
                         their stated maturity (other than in specified instalments (see
                         below), if applicable, or for taxation reasons or following an Event
                         of Default) or that such Notes will be redeemable at the option of
                         the relevant Issuer and/or the Noteholders upon giving not less than
                         30 nor more than 60 days’ irrevocable notice (or such other notice
                         period (if any) as is indicated in the applicable Final Terms) to the
                         Noteholders or the relevant Issuer, as the case may be, on a date or
                         dates specified prior to such stated maturity and/or subject to certain
                         conditions (if any) and at a price or prices and on such terms as are
                         indicated in the applicable Final Terms.

                         Any early redemption of a Dated Subordinated Note, an Undated
                         Subordinated Note or an Undated Deeply Subordinated Note will
                         be subject to the prior consent of the Bank of Portugal.

                         The Final Terms may provide that Notes may be redeemable in two
                         or more instalments of such amounts and on such dates as are
                         indicated in the applicable Final Terms.

Denomination of Notes:   Notes will be issued in such denominations as may be agreed
                         between the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer and as indicated
                         in the applicable Final Terms save that the minimum denomination
                         of each Note admitted to trading on a European Economic Area
                         exchange and/or offered to the public in a Member State of the
                         European Economic Area in circumstances which require the
                         publication of a prospectus under the Prospectus Directive will be
                         €1,000 (or, if the Notes are denominated in a currency other than
                         euro, the equivalent amount in such currency) or such higher
                         amount as may be allowed or required from time to time by the
                         relevant central bank (or equivalent body) or any laws or regulations
                         applicable to the relevant Specified Currency.

Taxation:                All payments in respect of the Notes will be made without
                         deduction for or on account of withholding taxes imposed within
                         any Relevant Tax Jurisdiction (as defined in Condition 7 of the
                         “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply


                                      9
                       Subordinated Notes)” and Condition 6 of the “Terms and
                       Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes”), subject as
                       provided in Condition 8 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes
                       (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” and Condition 7
                       of the “Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated
                       Notes”).

Negative Pledge:       The terms of the Senior Notes will contain a negative pledge
                       provision as further described in Condition 3 relating to Senior
                       Notes. The terms of the Dated Subordinated Notes, the Undated
                       Subordinated Notes and the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes
                       will contain no negative pledge.

Cross Default:         The terms of the Senior Notes will contain a cross default provision
                       as further described in Condition 10(A) relating to Senior Notes.
                       The terms of the Dated Subordinated Notes, the Undated
                       Subordinated Notes and the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes
                       will contain no cross default provision.

Status of the Notes:   The Senior Notes and the relative Receipts and Coupons will
                       constitute direct, unconditional, unsecured (subject to the
                       provisions of Condition 3) and unsubordinated obligations of the
                       relevant Issuer and will rank pari passu with all present and future
                       unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the relevant Issuer,
                       without any preference among themselves by reason of priority of
                       date of issue, currency of payment or otherwise, except for
                       obligations given priority by law.

                       The Dated Subordinated Notes and the relative Receipts and
                       Coupons will constitute direct, unsecured and subordinated
                       obligations of the relevant Issuer and will rank pari passu among
                       themselves and at least pari passu with all other present and future
                       dated subordinated obligations of the relevant Issuer, save for those
                       that have been accorded by law preferential rights. Without
                       prejudice to the foregoing, the Dated Subordinated Notes will, in
                       the event of a distribution of the assets in the dissolution or
                       liquidation of the relevant Issuer, rank senior to the share capital of
                       the relevant Issuer.

                       The Undated Subordinated Notes and the relative Receipts and
                       Coupons (if any) will constitute direct and unsecured obligations of
                       the relevant Issuer, subordinated as hereinafter referred to, and will
                       rank pari passu without any preference among themselves and at
                       least pari passu with all other present and future undated
                       subordinated obligations of the relevant Issuer, save for those that
                       have been accorded by law preferential rights. Without prejudice to
                       the foregoing, the Undated Subordinated Notes will, in the event of
                       a distribution of the assets in the dissolution or liquidation of the
                       relevant Issuer rank senior to the share capital of the relevant Issuer.

                       In order to allow each of the Issuers or the Bank to continue its
                       business activities (in accordance with the Bank of Portugal
                       Regulation 12/92 as amended), any amounts which would be
                       payable as principal or interest on the Undated Subordinated Notes,
                       will be available to meet the losses of the Issuer or of the Bank
                       provided: (a) that there has been (i) consumption of the whole of the
                       reserves and retained earnings; (ii) writing down of the ordinary


                                    10
share capital of the Issuer and the Bank and (iii) writing down of the
Issuer’s and the Bank’s preference shares (including any preference
share capital guaranteed by the Bank); and (b) that therefore the
Issuer’s and the Bank’s total shareholders’ equity and the preference
shares interests of the Issuer and the Bank have been reduced to
zero.

In the above circumstances where unpaid principal and interest may
be used to meet the losses of the Issuer or of the Bank, the unpaid
amounts of interest first and then principal will be cancelled and
utilised to the extent that may be necessary to meet the losses of the
Issuer or of the Bank. The cancelled amounts will only be reinstated
as subordinated credits of the corresponding holders as if such
amounts had never been written down or cancelled in the event of
(i) the winding-up, liquidation or bankruptcy of the Issuer or of the
Bank, in which event such reinstatement will be deemed to take
effect at the moment which immediately precedes the
commencement of the winding-up, liquidation or bankruptcy
proceedings; or of (ii) a decision being taken by the shareholders of
the Issuer or of the Bank to allow a dividend to be paid or to
reinstate the cancelled or written down amounts, in each case
subject to the approval of the Bank of Portugal. In both the above
cases and at all times, cancelled or written down amounts will revert
to being treated as subordinated credits of the corresponding
holders, without prejudice to the subordination regime applying
thereto.

During any period of cancellation or writing down such cancelled
or written down amounts shall not bear interest.

In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous proceedings of
the Issuer, no Noteholder (having a debt or a liability towards the
Issuer) may exercise any set-off or other similar rights against any
amounts held by the Issuer.

The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes and the relevant Coupons
(if any) will constitute direct, unsecured and subordinated
obligations of the Bank and will rank pari passu without any
preference among themselves, save for those that have been
accorded by law preferential rights. Without prejudice to the
foregoing, the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will, in the
event of a distribution of the assets in the dissolution or liquidation
of the Bank rank senior to the ordinary share capital of the Bank and
pari passu with the entitlements of holders of preferential shares of
the Bank.

In order to allow the Bank to continue its business activities (in
accordance with the Bank of Portugal Regulation 12/92 as
amended), any amounts which, subject to the limits of the “Terms
and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes” or, as
the case may be, the insolvency of the Bank, would be payable as
principal or interest under the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes,
will be available to meet the losses of the Bank.

In the above circumstances where unpaid principal and interest may
be used to meet the losses of the Bank, the unpaid nominal amounts
of interest first and then principal will be written down and utilised


            11
                           to the extent that may be necessary to meet the losses of the Bank.
                           The written down amounts will only be reinstated as subordinated
                           credits of the corresponding holders as if such amounts had never
                           been written down in the conditions mentioned in the “Terms and
                           Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes” below, i.e.
                           to the extent that the Bank’s Regulatory Capital registers a positive
                           variation resulting from an improvement in the Bank’s financial
                           condition as a consequence of gains obtained in the course of the
                           Bank’s activities, such reinstatement being made proportionally
                           between the outstanding nominal amount of the Undated Deeply
                           Subordinated Notes, and other instruments also eligible as Tier 1
                           Capital subject to limits ranking pari passu therewith and the
                           shareholders’ capital on a pro rata basis. In the above cases and at
                           all times, the reinstated amounts previously written down will revert
                           to being treated as subordinated credits of the corresponding
                           holders, with the same level of subordination as before being
                           written down.

                           During any period of writing down such written down amounts
                           shall not bear interest.

                           In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous proceedings of
                           the Bank, no Noteholder (having a debt or a liability towards the
                           Bank) may exercise any set-off or other similar rights against any
                           amounts held by the Bank.

Status of the Guarantee:   The payment of the principal of, and interest on, the Notes issued        A6.1
                                                                                                     A6.2
                           by BES Finance will be unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed
                           (the “Guarantee”) by the Bank pursuant to the Trust Deed. The
                           obligations of the Bank under such guarantee will:

                           (1) in the case of Senior Notes, constitute direct, unconditional,
                               unsecured (subject to the provisions of Condition 3) and
                               unsubordinated obligations of the Bank and will rank pari
                               passu with all present and future unsecured (subject as
                               aforesaid) and unsubordinated obligations (including those
                               arising under deposits received in its banking business) of the
                               Bank, except for obligations given priority by law;

                           (2) in the case of Dated Subordinated Notes, constitute direct,
                               unsecured obligations of the Bank but, in the event of
                               dissolution or liquidation of the Bank, subordinated in right of
                               payment to the claims of depositors and other unsecured
                               creditors of the Bank (other than creditors in respect of
                               indebtedness which is subordinated to at least the same extent
                               as the obligations of the Bank under its guarantee in respect of
                               the Dated Subordinated Notes); and

                           (3) in the case of Undated Subordinated Notes, constitute direct,
                               unsecured obligations of the Bank which, to the extent
                               permitted by Portuguese law, are subordinated to the claims of
                               Senior Creditors of the Bank, in that payment under the
                               Guarantee is conditional upon the Bank being solvent at the
                               time of payment and that no such payment shall be made except
                               to the extent that the Bank could make such payment and still
                               be solvent immediately thereafter. For this purpose, the Bank
                               shall be considered to be solvent if both (i) it is able to pay its


                                       12
                                        debts to the Senior Creditors of the Bank as they fall due and (ii)
                                        its Assets exceed its Liabilities to Senior Creditors of the Bank.

                                   A report as to the solvency of the Bank by (a) two directors of the
                                   Bank or, if the directors have not reported to BES Finance within 14
                                   days before any payment needs to be made pursuant to
                                   Condition 4(iii), the auditors of the Bank or (b) if the Bank is being
                                   wound up, its liquidator shall, in each case in the absence of
                                   manifest error, be treated and accepted by BES Finance, the Bank,
                                   the Trustee and the holders of Undated Subordinated Notes issued
                                   by BES Finance as correct and sufficient evidence thereof. For the
                                   purposes of Condition 4(iii):

                                   (A) “Assets” means the total consolidated gross assets of the Bank
                                       and “Liabilities” means the total consolidated gross liabilities
                                       of the Bank, all as shown by the latest published audited
                                       consolidated balance sheet of the Bank but adjusted for
                                       contingencies and for subsequent events in such manner and to
                                       such extent as such directors, auditors or liquidator, as the case
                                       may be, may determine to be appropriate; and

                                   (B) “Senior Creditors of the Bank” means creditors of the Bank
                                       who (x) are depositors or other unsubordinated creditors of the
                                       Bank or (y) are subordinated creditors of the Bank other than
                                       those whose claims rank pari passu with or junior to the
                                       claims of the holders of Undated Subordinated Notes and
                                       persons entitled to claim under the Guarantee in respect of
                                       such Notes.

                                   The obligations of the Bank under the Guarantee in respect of
                                   Undated Subordinated Notes are conditional upon the Bank being
                                   solvent immediately before and after payment by the Bank. Any
                                   amount which might otherwise have been allocated in or towards
                                   payment by BES Finance of principal and interest in respect of the
                                   Undated Subordinated Notes will be available to meet the losses of
                                   the Bank. In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous
                                   proceedings of the Bank, no Noteholder (having a debt or a liability
                                   towards the Bank) may exercise any set-off or other similar rights
                                   against any amounts held by the Bank.

Listing and admission to trading   Application has been made to the CSSF to approve this document             A5.6.2
                                                                                                              A12.6.2
and approval:                      as a base prospectus. Application has also been made to the
                                   Luxembourg Stock Exchange for Notes issued under the
                                   Programme to be admitted to trading on the Luxembourg Stock
                                   Exchange’s regulated market and to be listed on the Official List of
                                   the Luxembourg Stock Exchange.

                                   Notes may be listed or admitted to trading, as the case may be, on
                                   other or further stock exchanges or markets agreed between the
                                   Issuer and the relevant Dealer in relation to the Series. Notes which
                                   are neither listed nor admitted to trading on any market may also be
                                   issued.

                                   The applicable Final Terms will state whether or not the relevant
                                   Notes are to be listed and/or admitted to trading and, if so, on which
                                   stock exchanges and/or markets.




                                               13
Governing Law:          Bearer Notes and any non-contractual obligations arising out of or       A5.4.2
                                                                                                 A12.4.1.3
                        in connection with the Bearer Notes will be governed by and shall
                        be construed in accordance with English law, except that
                        Conditions 2(ii) and 2(iii) of the “Terms and Conditions of the
                        Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” where the
                        Bank acts in its capacity as issuer or guarantor, as the case may be,
                        Conditions 4(ii) and 4(iii) of the “Terms and Conditions of the
                        Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” and
                        Conditions 2, 4 and 6 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Undated
                        Deeply Subordinated Notes” (and, in each case, any non-
                        contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with such
                        Notes) will be governed by and construed in accordance with
                        Portuguese law. Interbolsa Notes and any non-contractual
                        obligations arising out of or in connection with them will be
                        governed by and shall be construed in accordance with Portuguese
                        law.

Selling Restrictions:   There are restrictions on the offer, sale and transfer of the Notes in
                        the United States, the European Economic Area (including the
                        United Kingdom and Portugal), Japan and the Cayman Islands. See
                        “Subscription and Sale” below.




                                    14
                                          RISK FACTORS
Each of the Issuers and the Guarantor believes that the following factors may affect its ability to fulfil its    A4.4
obligations under Notes issued under the Programme. Most of these factors are contingencies which may or          A5.2.1
may not occur and neither Issuer nor the Guarantor is in a position to express a view on the likelihood of        A11.3.1
any such contingency occurring.                                                                                   A12.2


In addition, factors which are material for the purpose of assessing the market risks associated with Notes
issued under the Programme are also described below.

Prospective investors should also read the detailed information set out elsewhere in this Prospectus and
reach their own views prior to making any investment decision.

RISK FACTORS RELATING TO BES

1.    Factors that may affect BES’ ability to fulfil its obligations under Notes to be issued by BES
      under the Programme or guaranteed by BES under the Deed of Guarantee

1.1   Financial system
      The performance of the BES Group is generally influenced by conditions in the global financial
      markets and the macroeconomic context of the countries in which it operates. In particular, the global
      financial system has operated under difficult conditions since August 2007 and the financial markets
      have had particularly negative performances after the declarations of insolvency of several
      international financial institutions since September 2008. This situation has caused disruptions in the
      financial markets worldwide, without precedent, in relation to liquidity and funding in the
      international banking system. Furthermore, this situation in turn has put significant pressure on the
      core business of many investment banks, commercial banks, and insurance companies worldwide. In
      peaked response to the instability and lack of liquidity in the market, some countries, including some
      members of the European Union and the United States, have intervened by injecting liquidity and
      capital into the system with the goal of stabilising these financial markets and, in some cases, with the
      aim of preventing the insolvency of financial institutions. Despite these measures, the volatility in the
      capital markets has continued at an extraordinary level compared to the past. Furthermore, the second
      half of 2010 was marked by the deterioration of European sovereign risk, which peaked at the
      beginning of May. In addition to investors’ fears, there emerged a cloud of uncertainty about the
      potential impact of the sovereign risk crisis on the European financial sector, which affected in
      particular the economies in the periphery of the Euro Zone. These developments have created an
      unfavourable environment for banking activity generally. The specific ways that the current economic
      environment create challenges for the BES Group, and may adversely affect its business, financial
      condition and results of operations, include the following:

      •      The circumstances mentioned above have caused a general slowdown in the business of the
             BES Group, an increase in the cost of funding (both wholesale and retail) and a reduction in
             share prices and in asset values. If a worsening of these circumstances occurs, the BES Group
             could suffer further negative consequences. Any worsening of the current economic
             environment could jeopardise BES’ strategy of selective expansion and impact its ability to
             meet client needs, which could adversely affect its profitability.

      •      The BES Group is exposed to a risk of losses if financial institutions or other counterparties to
             the BES Group become insolvent or, in any event, are not able to meet their obligations to the
             BES Group. Moreover, the performance of the BES Group may be influenced by an inability
             to recover the value of its own assets at percentage levels consistent with its own historical
             recovery estimates, which could prove to be no longer accurate within the present market
             context characterised by unprecedented turbulence.

      •      Numerous banks worldwide have been and are being supported in part by various “rescue
             plans” and other types of support by their home country governments. The BES Group is


                                                     15
             uncertain for how much longer governmental support will be needed to keep these banks
             solvent and whether governments will have the means or the political will to continue this
             support. Any failure of government support to continue could result in more bank failures and
             heightened lack of confidence in the global banking system, thus increasing the challenges
             faced by BES and other financial institutions.

      In general, developments relating to the current economic conditions and unfavourable financial
      environment, including those potential developments outlined above, could have a material adverse
      effect on the BES Group’s business, financial condition and results of operations.

1.2   Banking markets
      Structural changes in the Portuguese economy over the past several years have significantly increased
      competition in the Portuguese banking sector. These changes principally relate to the privatisation of
      several sectors of the economy, including banking and insurance, as well as to the integration of the
      Portuguese economy into the European Union and the introduction of the euro.

      BES, together with its consolidated subsidiaries (the “BES Group’’), faces intense competition in all
      of its areas of operation (including, among others, banking, investment banking, specialised credit and
      asset management). The BES Group’s competitors in the Portuguese markets are Portuguese
      commercial banks, savings and investment banks and foreign banks, many of which have recently
      entered the Portuguese market. Over the last years, mergers and acquisitions involving the largest
      Portuguese banks have resulted in a significant concentration of market shares, a process which may
      continue. Competition has increased further with the emergence of non-traditional distribution
      channels, such as internet and telephone banking. The BES Group’s principal competitors in the
      banking sector (ranking in terms of assets as of 31st December, 2009) are Caixa Geral de Depósitos,
      Millennium BCP, Santander Totta and BPI.

      Competition in the Portuguese market can have an adverse effect on the activities of BES Group. The
      structural changes in the Portuguese economy in recent years have considerably increased
      competition in the Portuguese banking market. Such changes were mainly related to the privatization
      of large sectors of the economy, such as banking and insurance, as well as with the integration of
      Portuguese economy in the European Union and the establishment of the Euro.

      The competition is affected by consumer demand, technological changes, impact of consolidation,
      regulatory actions and other factors. The Bank expects competition to intensify as continued merger
      activity in the financial industry produces larger, better-capitalised companies that are capable of
      offering a wider array of products and services, and at competitive prices. If the BES Group is unable
      to provide attractive product and service offerings that are profitable, it may lose market share or incur
      losses on some or all activities.

      Although BES believes that it is in a strong position to continue to compete in the Portuguese market,
      there is no assurance that it will be able to compete effectively in the markets in which it operates, or
      that it will be able to maintain or increase the level of its results of operations.

1.3   Economic environment
      As a financial group whose core businesses is banking (taking deposits and using them to grant loans)
      in Portugal, the state of the Portuguese economy affects the performance of the BES Group. For the
      year ended 31st December, 2009, approximately 66 per cent. of the Group’s net income was derived
      from its activities in Portugal. Consequently, the BES Group is particularly exposed to
      macroeconomic and other factors that affect growth in the Portuguese market as well as to the credit
      risk of its Portuguese banking private and corporate customers. After constant economic growth
      during the years of 1995 – 2000 the rate of growth of the Portuguese economy started to slow down
      in 2000. This reduction was intensified by the simultaneous slow down of the world economy.
      Following the financial crisis which began in 2007, the crisis in both confidence and liquidity led to
      a fall in demand in investment and production. The Portuguese economy, functioning within the
      European Union, experienced the adverse effects of the crisis. The prevailing economic conditions in


                                                      16
      the Portuguese market and the decrease of demand for credit and financial products and services in
      general, together with deterioration in the quality of assets had an adverse effect in the financial
      condition and the results of the BES Group. If the economic activities continue to grow at such a slow
      pace, the BES Group may face difficulties in accomplishing its growth strategy and the financial
      condition and results of BES Group may be adversely affected.

      To a lesser extent, BES’s performance, results of operations and financial condition are also affected
      by the economic conditions and levels of economic activity in other countries where the BES Group
      operates, such as Spain, Brazil and Angola. In addition, protracted economic declines could reduce
      the overall level of economic activity in the market, thereby reducing BES’ ability to collect deposits
      and forcing it to satisfy its liquidity requirements by resorting to the more expensive capital markets
      as a result.

1.4   Soundness of other financial institutions
      BES is exposed to many different counterparties in the normal course of its business; hence its
      exposure to counterparties in the financial services industry is significant. This exposure can arise
      through trading, lending, deposit-taking, clearance and settlement and numerous other activities and
      relationships. These counterparties include institutional clients, brokers and dealers, commercial
      banks, investment banks and mutuals. Many of these relationships expose BES to credit risk in the
      event of default of a counterparty or client. In addition, BES’s credit risk may be exacerbated when
      the collateral it holds cannot be realised at, or is liquidated at prices not sufficient to recover, the full
      amount of the loan or derivative exposure it is due to cover, which could in turn affect BES’ ability to
      meet its payments under the Notes. Many of the hedging and other risk management strategies utilised
      by BES also involve transactions with financial services counterparties. The insolvency of these
      counterparties may impair the effectiveness of BES’ hedging and other risk management strategies,
      which could in turn affect BES’ ability to meet its payments under the Notes and may have a material
      adverse effect on the each of BES’s financial condition and results of operations.

1.5   Interest Rate Risk
      The BES Group is subject to the risks typical of banking activities, such as interest rate fluctuations.
      Interest rate risk may be defined as the impact on shareholders’ equity or on net interest income due
      to an adverse change in market interest rates. As is the case with other banks in Portugal, the BES
      Group, and especially its banking and corporate operations segment, is particularly exposed to
      differentials between the interest rates payable by it on deposits and the interest rates that it is able to
      charge on loans to customers and other banks. This exposure stems from the fact that, in the
      Portuguese market, loans typically have variable interest rates, whereas the interest rates applicable to
      deposits are usually fixed for periods that may vary between three and six months. As a result,
      Portuguese banks, including the BES Group, frequently experience difficulties in adjusting the
      interest rates that they pay for deposits in line with market interest rate changes. This trend is
      reinforced by intense competition in the sector. The current low interest rate environment puts
      pressure on a bank’s deposit spread.

      Interest rate risk is monitored by the Assets and Liabilities Committee (“ALCO”), namely through the
      monitoring of net interest income and using repricing tables. BES Group’s exposure to interest rate
      risk is calculated based on Bank of International Settlements (“BIS”) methodology, classifying all
      Assets, Liabilities and off balance sheet items, excluding those from trading sources, by repricing
      schedules.

      If the BES Group is unable to adjust interest on deposits in line with the changes in market interest
      rates on loans, or if the monitoring procedures are unable to adequately manage interest rate risk, its
      interest income could rise less or decline more than its interest expense, in which case the BES
      Group’s results could be negatively affected. See “Risk Management and Selected Statistical
      Information” for a description of these specific risks.




                                                       17
1.6   Credit risk
      Risks arising from changes in credit quality and the repayment of loans and amounts due from
      borrowers and counterparties are inherent in a wide range of BES’ business. Adverse changes in the
      credit quality of BES’ borrowers and counterparties, a general deterioration in Portuguese or global
      economic conditions, or increased systemic risks in financial systems, could affect the recovery and
      value of BES’ assets and require an increase in provision for bad and doubtful debts and other
      provisions.

      The BES Group faces the risk of its borrowers and counterparties being unable to fulfill their payment
      obligations towards the BES Group. While the BES Group analyses its exposure to such borrowers
      and counterparties on a regular basis, as well as its exposure to certain economic sectors and regions
      which the BES Group believes to be particularly critical, payment defaults may result from
      circumstances which are unforeseeable or difficult to predict. In addition, the security and collateral
      provided to the BES Group may be insufficient to cover its exposure, for instance, as a result of
      sudden depreciations in the market which dramatically reduce the value of collateral. As such, in case
      borrowers or other material counterparties fail to comply with their payment obligations to the BES
      Group, this would have a material adverse effect on each of the BES Group’s financial condition and
      results of operations.

      The BES Group is strongly dedicated to the management of credit risks and to the analysis of credit
      transactions. Credit portfolio management is an ongoing process that requires interaction between the
      various teams responsible for the management of risk during the consecutive stages of the credit
      process, with the purpose of improving risk control methodologies, risk assessment and control tools,
      as well as in procedures and decision circuits. The Bank uses two major internal rating systems
      according to their specific characteristics, which are the Internal Rating Models for Corporate Credit
      Portfolios and the Internal Scoring for Retail Clients’ Credit Portfolios. The first is designed for large
      companies or institutional clients and credit ratings are assigned by a rating desk, which is organised
      into specialized teams, which use expert-based systems that include quantitative and qualitative
      variables linked to the industry sector. As per the Internal Scoring for Retail Clients’ Credit Portfolios
      and specifically in the context of the main products available to individual clients — mortgage loans,
      consumer loans, credit cards, overdrafts and loan — accounts the ratings are calibrated to a probability
      of default within one year. The models’ predictive capacity is subject to regular monitoring and the
      BES Group also regularly monitors other parameters required for risk quantification and management,
      namely losses at default and exposure at default figures (“LGD” and “EAD”). Nevertheless, the
      provisions regarding future credit losses may prove to be inaccurate for a number of reasons. Factors
      such as unexpected deterioration of global economic conditions, unexpected political events or a
      general lack of liquidity in economy may result in credit losses which exceed the amount of provisions
      of the BES Group or the maximum expected losses planned through the risk management procedures.
      To the extent that the BES Group transactions are mainly located in Portugal, the Bank is particularly
      exposed to the risk of a general economic contraction or to another event affecting default rates in
      Portugal.

      An increase in the BES Group’s provisions for losses resulting from defaulted loans or possible losses
      which exceed the amount of such provisions may have a significantly adverse effect on each of the
      BES Group’s financial condition and results of operations.

1.7   Operational Risk
      Operational risk represents the risk of losses or of a negative impact on the relationship with clients
      or other stakeholders resulting from inadequate or negligent application of internal procedures, or
      from people behaviour, information systems, or external events. Operational risk also includes the
      business/strategic risk, i.e., the risk of losses through fluctuations in volume/business/earnings/prices
      or costs.

      Legal risk is also included in the above definition. Legal risk represents the risk of losses arising from
      non-compliance with the regulations in force (due to inadequate document retention, failure to change



                                                      18
      processes as required by new legislation and/or differences in the interpretation of the law) or resulting
      from legal action.

      The BES Group is subject to certain operational risks, including interruption of service, errors, fraud
      by third parties (including large-scale organised frauds, as a result of the BES Group’s financial
      operations), breach or delays in providing services and in complying with risk management
      requirements. The BES Group continually monitors these risks by means of, among other things,
      advanced administrative and information systems and insurance coverage in respect of certain
      operational risks.

      To manage operational risk, BES Group implemented a system that standardises, systematises and
      regulates the frequency of actions viewing the identification, monitoring, control and mitigation of
      risk.

      These processes are part of a management model comprising two broad areas: the first concerns the
      collection and treatment of information, using tools that facilitate the identification and monitoring of
      risk; and the second uses the information that has been duly processed for the efficient management
      of risk, monitoring the more critical situations and implementing the risk management strategy. These
      two broad areas are coordinated through reporting to senior management and the monitoring of the
      mitigation measures determined.

      However, the BES Group may be unable to successfully monitor, manage or prevent these risks in the
      future. Any failure to successfully execute the BES Group’s risk management and control policies
      could have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of operations.

1.8   Liquidity Risk
      The liquidity risk arises from present or future inability to pay liabilities as they mature without
      resulting in exaggerated losses. Banks, by virtue of their business of providing long-term loans and
      receiving short-term deposits, are subject to liquidity risk. In recent years most banks have
      increasingly resorted to obtaining funds from market sources instead of from their traditional sources
      (retail deposits), especially in countries where savings are typically scarce due to economic
      stagnation, as is the case in Portugal. It is therefore important for banks to maintain a prudent and
      sound management of their liquidity risk, particularly in times of market turmoil.

      Although the BES Group puts great effort in liquidity risk management, which is centralised in its
      Financial Department, focusing on maintaining surplus liquidity in the short term, the BES Group is
      exposed to the general risk of liquidity shortfalls and cannot ensure that the mechanisms in place to
      manage such risks will be suitable to eliminate liquidity risk.

1.9   Market Risk
      The BES Group faces the risk of possible losses resulting from an adverse change in the value of
      financial instruments due to fluctuations in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, share prices or
      commodities prices.

      The BES Group employs market risk management strategies and market risk management is
      integrated with balance sheet management through the ALCO. This committee is responsible for
      defining policies for the structuring and composition of the balance sheet, and for the control of
      exposures to interest rate, foreign exchange and liquidity risk.

      The main measure of market risk is the assessment of potential losses under adverse market
      conditions, for which the Value at Risk (“VaR”) valuation criteria is used. The BES Group’s VaR
      model uses the Monte Carlo simulation, based on a confidence level of 99 per cent. and an investment
      period of 10 days. Volatilities and correlations are historical, based on an observation period of one
      year.

      Other initiatives have also been developed, such as back testing, consisting of comparing the losses
      foreseen by the VaR model with actual losses. Although these exercises permit to fine-tune the model


                                                      19
     and improve its predictive capabilities, along with stress testing which has also been developed in
     order to permit to assess the impact of higher potential losses than those considered using VaR
     valuation, the BES Group will be subject to losses whenever these procedures are insufficient to
     adequately manage the risk of possible losses resulting from adverse changes in the value of financial
     instruments.

1.10 Regulation
     The BES Group operates in a highly regulated industry. The BES Group’s banking activities are
     subject to extensive regulation by, among others, the European Central Bank, the Bank of Portugal
     and the Portuguese Securities Commission (Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários), who have
     broad administrative powers over many aspects of the financial services business, which may include
     liquidity, capital adequacy and permitted investments, ethical issues, money laundering, privacy,
     securities (including debt instruments) issuance and offering/placement, financial intermediation
     issues, record-keeping, marketing and selling practices. These various regulations can significantly
     increase the cost structure of a bank and limit its possibilities for increasing its income. Specific
     examples where regulation can impact the conduct of the BES Group’s business include the
     following:

     •     Currently, the minimum cash requirement applicable to Portuguese banks is fixed at 2 per cent.
           of the total amount of deposits. An increase in the minimum cash reserves or a decline in the
           rate accrued on those cash reserves would have an adverse impact on the BES Group’s net
           income.
     •     Portuguese banks are required to maintain a solvency ratio of at least 8 per cent. The solvency
           ratio is defined as Tier I capital plus Tier II capital divided by risk-weighted assets. As at
           30th June, 2010, the BES Group’s total solvency ratio was 11.1 per cent under the Basel II IRB
           Foundation Method, Core Tier I and Tier I ratio (based on risk-weighted assets as at 30th June
           2010), were 7.9 per cent. and 8.4 per cent., respectively. In November 2008, the Bank of
           Portugal issued an order recommending credit institutions to maintain, at the minimum, 8 per
           cent. of risk-weighted assets on a consolidated basis composed exclusively of Tier I capital
           starting on 30th September, 2009. Although BES believes the Bank of Portugal’s order is an
           adequate response to the current financial and economic environment, the capital adequacy
           requirements applicable to the BES Group may limit BES’ ability to extend credit to customers
           and may require it to issue additional equity capital or subordinated debt in the future, which
           are expensive sources of funds. Furthermore, capital adequacy ratios such as those mandated
           by Basel II have a “procyclical” effect, meaning that in difficult credit environments such as at
           present, a bank may find its capital ratios decreased at precisely the time that the economy is
           most in need of increased financing activity. Thus, as a result of this “procyclical” effect,
           capital adequacy requirements intended to ensure the health of banks can in fact exacerbate the
           effect of an economic downturn, further adding to the strain on the banking system.
     •     The Bank of Portugal has established minimum provisioning requirements regarding current
           loans, non-performing loans, overdue loans, impairment for securities and equity holdings,
           sovereign risk and other contingencies. Therefore, any change in these requirements could have
           an adverse impact on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of operations.

     •     The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision announced recently a substantial strengthening
           of existing capital rules, particularly as a result of the capital structure weaknesses
           demonstrated by the banking sector during the recent financial crisis. The new bank capital
           rules will be applicable from 1st January, 2013 and may have a significant impact on the
           ongoing activities and on the capital structure of the BES Group. The Committee’s package of
           reforms will increase the minimum common equity requirement from 2 per cent. to 4.5 per
           cent. In addition, banks will be required to hold a capital conservation buffer of 2.5 per cent. to
           withstand future periods of stress bringing the total common equity requirements to 7 per cent.




                                                    20
      •      The regulatory laws governing the activity of the BES Group may change at any time in ways
             which may have an adverse effect on its business. Furthermore, the BES Group cannot predict
             the timing or form of any future regulatory initiatives. Changes in existing regulatory laws may
             materially affect the way in which the BES Group conducts its business, the products and
             services it may offer and the value of its assets.

1.11 Risks associated with the implementation of its risk management policies.
      The BES Group is exposed to a number of risks, including, among others, market risk, credit risk,
      liquidity risk and operational risk. Although BES has implemented risk management policies for each
      of the risks that it is exposed to, taking into account worst case scenarios, the policies and procedures
      it employs to identify, monitor and manage these risks may not be fully effective.

1.12 Risks associated with the increasing use of sophisticated IT systems
      Banking activities are highly dependent on sophisticated IT systems. IT Systems are vulnerable to a
      number of problems, such as software and hardware flaws, criminal intrusion, physical damage to IT
      vital components and informatics viruses. The harmonization of BES Group’s IT Systems aimed at
      creating a consistent IT architecture poses a great challenge. IT systems require frequent updates in
      order to cope with the constant changes in business as well as the increasing regulatory requirements
      and to cope with the development rhythm of the current transaction of the BES Group in the domestic
      market and abroad. The BES Group may be unable to implement the necessary updates on time and
      such updates may not result as previously planned.

      Besides the costs which may be incurred as a result of the potential failure of its IT systems the BES
      Group may become subject to fines applied by regulatory entities in the banking sector in case its IT
      systems do not enable the BES Group to adequately comply with banking regulations or with
      reporting requirements. As a result, any significant interruption in the IT systems in place can have an
      extremely adverse effect in the activities, the results and the financial condition of the BES Group.

1.13 Risks associated with the ability to maintain the Bank’s client portfolio
      The success of the BES Group is largely dependent on its ability to maintain its clients portfolio and
      to provide them with a diversified range of competitive and high quality products as well as high
      service levels. The BES Group seeks to achieve these goals through the segmentation of its
      distribution net, and as a way to better serve the needs the different clients’ segments and also by cross
      selling products and services of its subsidiaries.

      The potential inability of BES to maintain its client portfolio or to offer its clients a wide range of
      competitive and high quality products or high levels of service could have an adverse effect in the
      financial situation and the results of the BES Group.

1.14 Risks associated with market transactions on the Bank’s own portfolio
      The BES Group performs transactions in the market using its own portfolio, which includes the
      entering into interest rate derivative instruments, credit, equity markets and currency rates, as well as
      the sale and purchase of bonds and shares issued in the domestic and in the international markets and
      the performance of transactions in the primary and secondary public debt markets.

      The VaR associated with transaction portfolios was as of June 2010 approximately €33.3 million
      (compared to €32.5 million on 31st December, 2009).

      While BES’ involvement in these activities is limited, transactions on its own portfolio involve a
      certain degree of risk. The future results of such transactions will mainly depend on market
      conditions, and the BES Group may incur in significant losses which may negatively affect its
      financial condition and results.




                                                      21
1.15 Risks relating to BES’s shareholding and corporate structure
      The major shareholders of BES hold, directly or indirectly, approximately a 50.81 per cent. of the
      voting rights of BES and have the ability to exercise significant influence over or determine the
      outcome of certain shareholder actions.

      Crédit Agricole, the second largest shareholder of BES, with a holding of 10.81 per cent., is ESFG’s
      strategic partner (the largest shareholder, with 40 per cent. of voting rights) in banking and insurance
      and holds five seats on the Board of Directors of BES, with one of these members also on the
      Executive Committee.

RISK FACTORS RELATING TO BES FINANCE

2.    Factors that may affect BES Finance’s ability to fulfil its obligations under the Notes issued
      under the Programme
BES Finance Ltd is a funding vehicle of the BES Group. As such it raises funds to BES by way of intragroup
loans. In the event that BES fails to make a payment under an intra-group loan, BES Finance may not be
able to meet its payment obligations under the issued Notes.

RISK FACTORS RELATING TO THE NOTES ISSUED UNDER THE PROGRAMME

3.    Factors which are material for the purpose of assessing the market risks associated with Notes
      issued under the Programme

3.1   The Notes may not be a suitable investment for all investors
      Each potential investor in the Notes must determine the suitability of that investment in light of its
      own circumstances. In particular, each potential investor should:

      (i)     have sufficient knowledge and experience to make a meaningful evaluation of the Notes, the
              merits and risks of investing in the Notes and the information contained or incorporated by
              reference in this Prospectus or any applicable supplement to this Prospectus;
      (ii)    have access to, and knowledge of, appropriate analytical tools to evaluate, in the context of its
              particular financial situation, an investment in the Notes and the impact the Notes will have on
              its overall investment portfolio;
      (iii)   have sufficient financial resources and liquidity to bear all of the risks of an investment in the
              Notes, including Notes with principal or interest payable in one or more currencies, or where
              the currency for principal or interest payments is different from the potential investor’s
              currency;
      (iv)    understand thoroughly the terms of the Notes and be familiar with the behaviour of any relevant
              indices and financial markets; and
      (v)     be able to evaluate (either alone or with the help of a financial adviser) possible scenarios for
              economic, interest rate and other factors that may affect its investment and its ability to bear
              the applicable risks.

      Some Notes are complex financial instruments. Sophisticated institutional investors generally do not
      purchase complex financial instruments as stand-alone investments. They purchase complex financial
      instruments as a way to reduce risk or enhance yield with an understood, measured, appropriate
      addition of risk to their overall portfolios. A potential investor should not invest in Notes which are
      complex financial instruments unless it has the expertise (either alone or with a financial adviser) to
      evaluate how the Notes will perform under changing conditions, the resulting effects on the value of
      the Notes and the impact this investment will have on the potential investor’s overall investment
      portfolio.




                                                      22
3.2   Risks related to the structure of a particular issue of Notes
      A wide range of Notes may be issued under the Programme. A number of these Notes may have
      features which contain particular risks for potential investors. Set out below is a description of the
      most common such features:

      Notes subject to optional redemption by the Issuer
      An optional redemption feature of Notes is likely to limit their market value. During any period when
      the Issuer may elect to redeem Notes, the market value of those Notes generally will not rise
      substantially above the price at which they can be redeemed. This also may be true prior to any
      redemption period.

      The Issuer may be expected to redeem Notes when its cost of borrowing is lower than the interest rate
      on the Notes. At those times, an investor generally would not be able to reinvest the redemption
      proceeds at an effective interest rate as high as the interest rate on the Notes being redeemed and may
      only be able to do so at a significantly lower rate. Potential investors should consider reinvestment risk
      in light of other investments available at that time.

      Index Linked Notes and Dual Currency Notes
      The Issuer may issue Notes with principal or interest determined by reference to an index or formula,
      to changes in the prices of securities or commodities, to movements in currency exchange rates or
      other factors (each, a “Relevant Factor”). In addition, the Issuer may issue Notes with principal or
      interest payable in one or more currencies which may be different from the currency in which the
      Notes are denominated. Potential investors should be aware that:

      (i)     the market price of such Notes may be volatile;

      (ii)    they may receive no interest;

      (iii)   payment of principal or interest may occur at a different time or in a different currency than
              expected;

      (iv)    they may lose all or a substantial portion of their principal;

      (v)     a Relevant Factor may be subject to significant fluctuations that may not correlate with changes     A12.2

              in interest rates, currencies or other indices;

      (vi)    if a Relevant Factor is applied to Notes in conjunction with a multiplier greater than one or
              contains some other leverage factor, the effect of changes in the Relevant Factor on principal
              or interest payable likely will be magnified; and

      (vii) the timing of changes in a Relevant Factor may affect the actual yield to investors, even if the
            average level is consistent with their expectations. In general, the earlier the change in the
            Relevant Factor, the greater the effect on yield.

      The historical experience of an index should not be viewed as an indication of the future performance
      of such index during the term of any Index Linked Notes. Accordingly, each potential investor should
      consult its own financial and legal advisers about the risk entailed by an investment in any Index
      Linked Notes and the suitability of such Notes in light of its particular circumstances.

      Partly-paid Notes
      The Issuer may issue Notes where the issue price is payable in more than one instalment. Failure to
      pay any subsequent instalment could result in an investor losing all of his investment.

      Variable rate Notes with a multiplier or other leverage factor
      Notes with variable interest rates can be volatile investments. If they are structured to include
      multipliers or other leverage factors, or caps or floors, or any combination of those features or other



                                                       23
similar related features, their market values may be even more volatile than those for securities that
do not include those features.

Inverse Floating Rate Notes
Inverse Floating Rate Notes have an interest rate equal to a fixed rate minus a rate based upon a
reference rate such as LIBOR. The market values of those Notes typically are more volatile than
market values of other conventional floating rate debt securities based on the same reference rate (and
with otherwise comparable terms). Inverse Floating Rate Notes are more volatile because an increase
in the reference rate not only decreases the interest rate of the Notes, but may also reflect an increase
in prevailing interest rates, which further adversely affects the market value of these Notes.

Fixed/Floating Rate Notes
Fixed/Floating Rate Notes may bear interest at a rate that converts from a fixed rate to a floating rate,
or from a floating rate to a fixed rate. Where the Issuer has the right to effect such a conversion, this
will affect the secondary market and the market value of the Notes since the Issuer may be expected
to convert the rate when it is likely to produce a lower overall cost of borrowing. If the Issuer converts
from a fixed rate to a floating rate in such circumstances, the spread on the Fixed/Floating Rate Notes
may be less favourable than then prevailing spreads on comparable Floating Rate Notes tied to the
same reference rate. In addition, the new floating rate at any time may be lower than the rates on other
Notes. If the Issuer converts from a floating rate to a fixed rate in such circumstances, the fixed rate
may be lower than then prevailing rates on its Notes.

Notes issued at a substantial discount or premium
The market values of securities issued at a substantial discount or premium from their principal amount
tend to fluctuate more in relation to general changes in interest rates than do prices for conventional
interest-bearing securities. Generally, the longer the remaining term of the securities, the greater the
price volatility as compared to conventional interest-bearing securities with comparable maturities.

The Issuer’s obligations under Subordinated Notes are subordinated
The Issuer’s obligations under Subordinated Notes will be unsecured and subordinated and will rank
junior in priority of payment to its obligations to Senior Creditors. “Senior Creditors” means creditors
of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank who (x) are depositors or other unsubordinated creditors
of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank or (y) are subordinated creditors of the Issuer or, as the
case may be, the Bank other than those whose claims rank par passu with or junior to the claims of
the holders of Subordinated Notes or (in respect of the Bank) persons entitled to claim under the
Guarantee in respect of such Notes. Although Subordinated Notes may pay a higher rate of interest
than comparable Notes which are not subordinated, there is a real risk that an investor in Subordinated
Notes will lose all or some of his investment should the Issuer become insolvent.

Under certain conditions, interest payments under Undated Subordinated Notes may be deferred
If on any Interest Payment Date in relation to which no dividend or other distribution has been
declared, paid or made on any class of the stock or share capital of the Issuer or, where the Issuer is
BES Finance, the Bank in the immediately preceding interest period, then the Issuer may defer the
payment of interest on the Undated Subordinated Notes.

In no event will holders of Undated Subordinated Notes be able to accelerate the maturity of their
Undated Subordinated Notes; such holders will have claims only for amounts then due and payable
on their Undated Subordinated Notes. After the Issuer has fully paid all deferred interest on any issue
of Undated Subordinated Notes and if that issue of Undated Subordinated Notes remains outstanding,
future interest payments on that issue of Undated Subordinated Notes will be subject to further
deferral as described above.

Any deferral of interest payments will likely have an adverse effect on the market price of the Undated
Subordinated Notes. In addition, as a result of the interest deferral provision of the Undated



                                                24
Subordinated Notes, the market price of the Undated Subordinated Notes may be more volatile than
the market prices of other debt securities on which original issue discount or interest accrues that are
not subject to such deferrals and may be more sensitive generally to adverse changes in the Issuer’s
financial condition.

Credit Linked Notes

General risks relating to Credit Linked Notes
The Issuer may issue Notes (“Credit Linked Notes”) (i) where the amount payable on redemption is
dependent upon whether one or more specified events (“Credit Events”) have occurred in respect of
one or more Reference Entity/Entities and, if so, on the value of certain specified obligations of such
Reference Entity/Entities or (ii) where, if a Credit Event has occurred, the Issuer’s obligation on
redemption is to deliver certain specified obligations of the relevant Reference Entity/Entities.

Prospective investors in any such Credit Linked Notes should be aware that depending on the terms
of the Credit Linked Notes (i) they assume credit risk in relation to all specified Reference Entities
and related obligations of those Reference Entities, (ii) they may receive no or a limited amount of
interest, (iii) (A) the payment of the redemption amount or interest or (B) the delivery of any specified
obligations may occur at a different time than expected and (iv) they may lose all or a substantial
portion of their investment.

Cash Settlement
The market price of Credit Linked Notes may be volatile and will be affected by, amongst other
things, the time remaining to the redemption date or settlement date, as applicable, prevailing credit
spreads and the creditworthiness of the Reference Entity/Entities which in turn may be affected by the
economic, financial and political events in one or more jurisdictions. In addition investors will be
exposed to market conditions and price risk in relation to the determination of the Final Price or
Auction Final Price in the case of cash settled Credit Linked Notes. This will directly affect the return
to investors following a Credit Event. In extreme circumstances, such as prevailed in certain securities
markets following the insolvency of Lehman Brothers, market participants may not be willing to bid
or to provide quotes for a considerable period of time. As a result, the market price determined for a
given obligation – even for obligations that are fully performing – may be zero, in which case
investors will risk losing 100 per cent. of their investment. Unless the Final Terms provide otherwise,
it will not be relevant to determining the Final Price or the Auction Final Price that extreme
circumstances may be affecting the market as a whole or that the market price of a security or
obligation may recover at a future date after the Final Price or the Auction Final Price has been
determined. In certain circumstances the Issuer may select obligations of the Reference Entity/Entities
in respect of which a Credit Event has occurred and in this case will be entitled to select Reference
Obligations of a lower value than other possible Reference Obligations. This will have the effect of
reducing the return on the Notes.

Physical Settlement
Where the Credit Linked Notes provide for physical delivery, the Issuer may determine that the
specified obligations to be delivered are either (a) obligations which for any reason (including,
without limitation, failure of the relevant clearance system or due to any law, regulation, court order
or market conditions or the failure to obtain any requisite consents with respect to the delivery of
obligations which are loans) it is impossible or illegal to deliver on the specified settlement date or (b)
obligations of the relevant Reference Entity which the Issuer and/or any of its Affiliates has not
received under the terms of any transaction and/or trading position entered into by the Issuer and/or
any of its Affiliates to hedge the Issuer’s obligations in respect of the Credit Linked Notes. Any such
determination may delay settlement in respect of the Credit Linked Notes and/or cause the obligation
to deliver such specified obligations to be replaced by an obligation to pay a cash amount which, in
either case, may affect the value of the Credit Linked Notes and, in the case of payment of a cash
amount, will affect the timing of the valuation of such Credit Linked Notes and, as a result, the amount



                                                25
payable on redemption. Prospective investors should review the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes
(other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” and the applicable Final Terms to ascertain whether
and how such provisions may apply to the Credit Linked Notes.

The Issuer, the Guarantor, the Dealer(s) or any of their respective Affiliates may have acquired, or
during the term of the Credit Linked Notes may acquire, non-public information with respect to the
Reference Entity/Entities that they may not disclose. Prospective investors must therefore make an
investment decision based upon their own due diligence and purchase the Credit Linked Notes in the
knowledge that non-public information which the Issuer, the Guarantor, the Dealer(s) or any of their
respective Affiliates may have will not be disclosed to investors. None of the Issuer, the Guarantor, the
Dealer(s) and any of their respective Affiliates is under any obligation (i) to review on the
Noteholders’ behalf, the business, financial conditions, prospects, creditworthiness, status or affairs of
the Reference Entity/Entities or conduct any investigation or due diligence into the Reference
Entity/Entities or (ii) other than as may be required by applicable rules and regulations relating to the
Credit Linked Notes, to make available (a) any information relating to the Credit Linked Notes or (b)
any non-public information they may possess in respect of the Reference Entity/Entities.

In the case of Physical Delivery, where the Reference Obligation is a loan, in order for the Delivery
of the loan (or an interest in the loan) to be effected, the Reference Obligation must be capable of
being transferred to the Noteholders in accordance with its terms and the Noteholders must have the
capacity to hold such loan (or loan interest).

The Issuer’s obligations in respect of Credit Linked Notes are irrespective of the existence or amount
of the Issuer’s and/or any of its Affiliates’ credit exposure to a Reference Entity and the Issuer and/or
any of its Affiliates need not suffer any loss nor provide evidence of any loss as a result of the
occurrence of a Credit Event.

2003 ISDA Credit Derivatives Definitions
While there are many similarities between the terms used in this Prospectus (in particular, in
Condition 24 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated
Notes)”) and the terms used in the 2003 ISDA Credit Derivative Definitions, as supplemented from
time to time, (the “Credit Derivative Definitions”), there are a number of differences. In particular, the
Issuer and the Guarantor have determined that certain provisions of the Credit Derivatives Definitions,
which are intended for use by market participants in “over the counter” transactions, require
amendment when incorporated in the terms of an offering of securities such as the Credit Linked
Notes. Therefore, a prospective investor should understand that the complete terms and conditions of
the Credit Linked Notes are as set out in this Prospectus and the applicable Final Terms and that the
Credit Derivative Definitions are not incorporated by reference herein. Consequently, investing in
Credit Linked Notes is not necessarily equivalent to investing in a credit default swap that incorporates
the Credit Derivatives Definitions.

While ISDA has published and supplemented the Credit Derivatives Definitions in order to facilitate
transactions and promote uniformity in the credit derivatives market, the credit derivatives market has
evolved over time and is expected to continue to change. Consequently, the Credit Derivatives
Definitions and the terms applied to credit derivatives, including Credit Linked Notes, are subject to
further evolution. Past events have shown that the views of market participants may differ as to how
the Credit Derivatives Definitions operate or should operate. As a result of the continued evolution in
the market, the Credit Linked Notes may not conform to future market standards. Such a result may
have a negative impact on the Credit Linked Notes.

There can be no assurances that changes to the terms applicable to credit derivatives generally will be
predicable or favourable to the Issuer, the Guarantor or the Noteholders. Future amendments or
supplements to the terms applicable to credit derivatives generally will only apply to Credit Linked
Notes that have already been issued if the Issuer and the Noteholders agree to amend such Credit
Linked Notes to incorporate such amendments or supplements and other conditions to amending the
Credit Linked Notes have been met.


                                                26
Risks relating to Physical Settlement
In the case of Physical Settlement, the Issuer, pursuant to Condition 24(d) of the “Terms and
Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”, shall be entitled to select
any of the Deliverable Obligations to constitute the Asset Amount, irrespective of their market value.
In order to maximise the value of the credit protection it has purchased under a Credit Linked Note,
the Issuer is likely to select the cheapest Deliverable Obligation available to it in the market. Under
the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” (and as
indicated in the applicable Final Terms) there may be restrictions imposed as to what qualifies as a
Deliverable Obligation, to exclude excessively long-dated bonds. However there is a possibility that
a Deliverable Obligation will be longer dated than the Credit Linked Notes thus changing the maturity
of the Noteholder’s initial investment. The market value of the Deliverable Obligations, if they are
more long-term obligations, compared with their nominal value will generally be lower than in the
case of obligations of a shorter term. Moreover if obligations with a longer term to maturity than the
Credit Linked Notes are delivered there is a greater risk that general interest rate levels will increase
following the delivery, thus reducing the value of the Noteholder’s investment.

The Noteholder could receive the Deliverable Obligations denominated in a currency other than the
currency of the Credit Linked Notes and would then bear the risk of currency movements between the
determination of the Asset Amount and the Delivery.

Risks relating to Auction Settlement of Credit Linked Notes

Auction Settlement

Where an Auction Final Price Determination Date occurs, the Auction Final Price will be determined
according to an auction procedure set out in the relevant Transaction Auction Settlement Terms, a
form of which will be published by ISDA on its website at www.isda.org (or any successor website
thereto) from time to time and may be amended by ISDA without notice to the holders of the Credit
Linked Notes from time to time. The Auction Final Price determined pursuant to an auction may be
less than the market value that would otherwise have been determined in respect of the relevant
Reference Entity or Reference Obligation. The Issuer, the Guarantor and the Noteholders may have
little or no influence in the outcome of any such auction.

Auction Final Price and the Issuer's and/or the Guarantor's ability to influence the Auction Final
Price

There is a possibility that the Issuer, the Guarantor or the Calculation Agent (or one of their respective
Affiliates) would act as a participating bidder in any auction to determine the Auction Final Price. In
such capacity, it may take certain actions which may influence the Auction Final Price including
(without limitation): (a) providing rates of conversion to determine the applicable currency conversion
rates to be used to convert any obligations which are not denominated in the auction currency into
such currency for the purposes of the auction; and (b) submitting bids, offers and physical settlement
requests with respect to the relevant Deliverable Obligations. In deciding whether to take any such
action (or whether to act as a participating bidder in any auction), the Issuer, the Guarantor or the
Calculation Agent (or an Affiliate of any of them) shall be under no obligation to consider the interests
of any Noteholder.
If the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee does not decide to conduct an auction
with respect to obligations of the relevant Reference Entity satisfying the relevant characteristics as
set out in the applicable Final Terms, then the Fallback Settlement Method shall apply. In such
circumstances, either the Final Price will be determined pursuant to the Valuation Method or the Issuer
will Deliver to Noteholders the Asset Amount.




                                                27
Role of the Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee

Credit Derivatives Determinations Committees were established pursuant to the March 2009
Supplement to the Credit Derivatives Definitions to make determinations that are relevant to the
majority of the credit derivatives market and to promote transparency and consistency. In respect of a
Credit Event relating to a Credit Linked Note, prospective purchasers should note that the relevant
Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has the power to make binding decisions on critical
issues such as whether a Credit Event or Succession Event has occurred, which obligations are to be
valued and whether an auction should take place in accordance with and as more fully described in
the Credit Derivatives Determinations Committees Rules, a form of which may be published by ISDA
on its website at www.isda.org (or any successor website thereto) from time to time and as amended
from time to time in accordance with the terms thereof. Consequently, the payments on the Credit
Linked Notes and the timing of any such payments may be affected by any such relevant decisions or
subsequent determinations if Auction Settlement is specified as the applicable Settlement Method in
the applicable Final Terms.

Credit Event and Succession Event Backstop Dates
In respect of a Credit Event relating to a Series of Credit Linked Notes, a Credit Event may not be
triggered unless a request is submitted to ISDA for the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations
Committee to consider whether the relevant event constitutes a Credit Event within 60 calendar days
of the occurrence of such potential Credit Event unless a Credit Event Determination Date has already
occurred with respect to such event. For Succession Events, the look-back period is 90 calendar days
and functions similarly. These provisions mean that there is a time limit on the ability to act on a
Credit Event or Succession Event and that it is possible that the Credit Linked Notes could be affected
by a Credit Event or Succession Event that took place prior to the Trade Date.

Succession Event risk
Succession Events arise where a Reference Entity transfers all or some only of its principal debt
obligations to a third party or merges with a third party to produce a new entity. Succession Events
may occur at any time. If a Succession Event occurs in relation to a Reference Entity or Reference
Entities, whether by operation of law or pursuant to any agreement, the Reference Entity, or in the
case of more than one Reference Entity, the composition of the Reference Entities within the portfolio
of Reference Entities, may change. For example the third party to which a Reference Entity had
transferred its debt obligations may replace that Reference Entity as the specified Reference Entity.
Any risk which may result from such a change of Reference Entities will be borne by the Noteholders.
New Reference Entities resulting from a Succession Event may be less creditworthy than the original
Reference Entity, which in turn could decrease the value of the Credit Linked Notes.

Extension of Scheduled Maturity Date
Under Conditions 24(e), (f), (g) and (h) of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than
Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” the Calculation Agent may in its sole discretion postpone the
Maturity Date upon: (i) the Calculation Agent determining that the Repudiation/Moratorium
Extension Condition has been satisfied; (ii) the Calculation Agent determining that a Potential Failure
to Pay has occurred with respect to one or more of the Reference Obligations; (iii) the Calculation
Agent determining that a Potential Credit Event has occurred; or (iv) the Calculation Agent
determining that a Credit Event or a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium may have occurred.

Settlement Suspension, Adjustments and Interest Provisions

If, following the determination of a Credit Event Determination Date in accordance with sub-
paragraph (a) of the definition of Credit Event Determination Date but prior to the Settlement Date or,
to the extent applicable, a Valuation Date, ISDA publicly announces that the conditions to convening
a Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee to determine the occurrence of a Credit Event have
been satisfied, the Calculation Agent may at its option determine that the applicable timing
requirements of Condition 24 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply


                                              28
      Subordinated Notes)” and the definitions of Credit Event Redemption Date, Valuation Date, Physical
      Settlement Period, and any other provision of Condition 24 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes
      (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” as determined by the Calculation Agent in its sole
      discretion, shall toll and be suspended and remain suspended (such period of suspension, a
      “Suspension Period”) until such time as ISDA subsequently publicly announces that the relevant
      Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has resolved (a) that a Credit Event has or has not
      occurred or (b) not to determine such matters. Once ISDA has publicly announced that the relevant
      Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has made such resolution, the relevant timing
      requirements of Condition 24 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Notes)” that have previously tolled or been suspended shall resume on the Business Day
      following such public announcement by ISDA.
      In the event of any such Suspension Period, the Calculation Agent may make (i) such consequential
      or other adjustment(s) or determination(s) to or in relation to Condition 24 of the “Terms and
      Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)” as may be desirable or
      required either during or following any relevant Suspension Period to account for or reflect such
      suspension and (ii) determine the effective date of such adjustment(s) or determination(s).

      In the case of interest bearing Credit Linked Notes:
      (a)    if a Suspension Period falls in any one or more Interest Period(s), then no interest (or any
             interest on any delayed payment of interest) shall accrue during each portion of an Interest
             Period during which a Suspension Period exists; and
      (b)    if an Interest Payment Date falls in a Suspension Period, such Interest Payment Date will be
             deferred until such date as determined by the Calculation Agent falling no earlier than the first
             Interest Payment Date and no later than the fifth Interest Payment Date following the end of
             the Suspension Period, all subject to the provisions of Condition 5 and Conditions 24(e), (f)
             and (g) of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated
             Notes)”.
      Investors should note that in addition to redemption at maturity or following a Credit Event, Credit
      Linked Notes may be subject to early redemption for tax reasons or following a merger of the Issuer
      and a Reference Entity. In this case the Early Redemption Amount will be as specified in the
      applicable Final Terms and may reflect the market value of credit derivative transactions in relation to
      the Reference Entity/Entities at such time as well as certain unwind costs of the Issuer.

      In certain circumstances the scheduled maturity of the Notes may also be delayed as provided in
      Condition 24 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated
      Notes)” to allow certain credit derivative determinations to be made in respect of the Credit Linked
      Notes. Investors will not receive any additional payment for such delay. See in particular Condition
      24 (e) (Repudiation/Moratorium Extension), Condition 24 (f) (Grace Period Extension), Condition 24
      (g) (Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee Extension) and Condition 24 (h) (Maturity Date
      Extension) of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated
      Notes)”.

3.3   Risks related to Notes generally
      Set out below is a brief description of certain risks relating to the Notes generally:

      Modification and substitution
      The conditions of the Notes contain provisions for calling meetings of Noteholders to consider
      matters affecting their interests generally. These provisions permit defined majorities to bind all
      Noteholders including Noteholders who did not attend and vote at the relevant meeting and
      Noteholders who voted in a manner contrary to the majority.

      The conditions of the Bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes also provide that the Trustee may,
      without the consent of Noteholders, agree to (i) modifications of the Notes which are not, in the



                                                     29
opinion of the Trustee, materially prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders or (ii) modifications
to the Notes or the Trust Deed of a formal, minor or technical nature or which are made to correct a
manifest error or to comply with mandatory provisions of the law of the jurisdiction in which the
Issuer is incorporated or (iii) the substitution of another company as principal debtor under any Notes
in place of the Issuer, in the circumstances described in Condition 18 of the “Terms and Conditions
of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”. Interbolsa Notes are not constituted
by the Trust Deed and thus any such modification or substitution will have to be agreed in accordance
with the provisions of meetings of holders of Interbolsa Notes (see Condition 15(b) of the “Terms and
Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”).

EU Savings Directive
Under EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC on the taxation of savings income, Member States are
required to provide to the tax authorities of another Member State details of payments of interest or
similar income (similar income for this purpose includes, but is not limited to, payments on
redemption of the Notes representing any discount on the issue of the Notes or any premium payable
on redemption) paid by a person within its jurisdiction to an individual resident in that other Member
State or to certain limited types of entities established in that other Member State. However, for a
transitional period, Luxembourg and Austria are instead required (unless during that period they elect
otherwise) to operate a withholding system in relation to such payments (the ending of such
transitional period being dependent upon the conclusion of certain other agreements relating to
information exchange with certain other countries). A number of non-EU countries and territories
including Switzerland have adopted similar measures (a withholding system in the case of
Switzerland).

On 15th September, 2008 the European Commission issued a report to the Council of the European
Union on the operation of the Directive, which included the Commission's advice on the need for
changes to the Directive. On 13th November, 2008 the European Commission published a more
detailed proposal for amendments to the Directive, which included a number of suggested changes.
The European Parliament approved an amended version of this proposal on 24th April, 2009 which is
under discussion by the European Council. If any of those proposed changes are made in relation to
the Directive, they may amend or broaden the scope of the requirements described above.

If a payment were to be made or collected through a Member State which has opted for a withholding
system, or through a non-EU country which has adopted similar measures and has opted for a
withholding system, or through certain dependent or associated territories which have adopted similar
measures and which have opted for a withholding system, and an amount of, or in respect of, tax were
to be withheld from that payment, neither the Issuer nor any Paying Agent nor any other person would
be obliged to pay additional amounts with respect to any Note as a result of the imposition of such
withholding tax. The Issuer is required to maintain a Paying Agent in a Member State that will not
be obliged to withhold or deduct tax pursuant to the Directive.

Notes where denominations involve integral multiples: definitive Notes
In relation to any issue of Notes which have denominations consisting of a minimum Specified
Denomination plus one or more higher integral multiples of another smaller amount, it is possible that
such Notes may be traded in amounts that are not integral multiples of such minimum Specified
Denomination. Should definitive Notes be printed, a holder who, as a result of trading such amounts,
holds an amount which is less than the minimum Specified Denomination in his account with the
relevant clearing system at the relevant time may not receive a definitive Note in respect of such
holding and would need to purchase a principal amount of Notes such that its holding amounts to a
Specified Denomination.

If definitive Notes are issued, Noteholders should be aware that definitive Notes which have a
denomination that is not an integral multiple of the minimum Specified Denomination may be illiquid
and difficult to trade.




                                               30
3.4   Risks relating to Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes

      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes are deeply subordinated obligations and will be
      subordinated to all of BES' existing and future indebtedness.
      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes are by their terms deeply subordinated in right of payment
      to all current and future unsubordinated and subordinated (other than deeply subordinated)
      indebtedness of BES. In the event of a distribution of the assets in the dissolution or liquidation of
      BES the rights of payment of the holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes shall rank in priority
      only to any payments to holders of BES’ shares. In the event of incomplete payment of
      unsubordinated creditors, the obligations of BES in connection with the Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Notes will be terminated. Although the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes may pay a
      higher rate of interest than comparable notes which are not deeply subordinated, there is a greater
      potential risk that an investor in the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will lose all or some of its
      investment should BES become insolvent.

      There is no restriction on the amount of debt that BES may issue that ranks senior to the Undated
      Deeply Subordinated Notes or on the amount of securities that it may issue that rank pari passu with
      the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes. The issue of any such debt or securities may reduce the
      amount recoverable by investors upon the bankruptcy or BES. If BES' financial condition were to
      deteriorate, the holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes could suffer direct and materially
      adverse consequences, including cancellation of interest and reduction of interest and principal and,
      if BES were liquidated (whether voluntarily or involuntarily), the holders of Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Notes could suffer loss of their entire investment.

      There are no events of default under the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes.
      The “Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes” do not provide for events of
      default allowing acceleration of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes if certain events occur and
      the holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will not be entitled to initiate insolvency
      proceedings against BES for failure of any payment under the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes.
      Accordingly, if BES fails to meet any obligations under the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes,
      including the payment of any interest, investors will not have the right of acceleration of principal.

      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will be available to cover losses of BES
      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes are being issued for capital adequacy regulatory purposes
      with the intention and purpose of being eligible as Tier 1 Capital of BES. See Condition 2(a) of the
      Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes (“Status and subordination of the Undated Deeply Subordinated
      Notes”). Such eligibility depends upon a number of conditions being satisfied, which are reflected in
      the “Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes”. One of these relates to the
      ability of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes and the proceeds of their issue to be available to
      absorb any losses of BES. Accordingly, in certain circumstances and/or upon the occurrence of certain
      events, payments of interest under the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes may be restricted and, in
      certain cases, forfeited and the amount of interest and the principal amount of the Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Notes may be reduced. See Conditions 2(b) and 4(d) of the Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Notes (“Loss Absorption” and “Interest Cancellation”).

      Under the mentioned conditions, the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will be available and may
      be used to absorb losses of BES, if that is necessary for BES to continue its business activities,
      proportionally between the nominal amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes, other
      undated deeply subordinated notes ranking pari passu therewith and the share capital of the Bank on
      a pro rata basis, in accordance with a decision taken by the Executive Committee of BES to that effect
      or further to a direction received from the Bank of Portugal in case BES is at risk of failing to comply
      with the Own Funds Requirements Regulations applicable to it. In these circumstances the nominal
      amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will be reduced to the extent necessary to absorb
      BES’ losses, whenever the amount of the Bank’s Regulatory Capital (as defined in the “Terms and
      Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes”) excluding the Undated Deeply Subordinated


                                                     31
      Notes and other instruments also eligible to Tier 1 Capital subject to limits, is below the amount of
      the share capital of the Bank with reference to the most recently published financial statements of the
      Bank or whenever the Bank is at risk of non-compliance with the Own Funds Requirements
      Regulations, at an individual or consolidated level as appropriate, in the opinion of either the Bank or
      the Bank of Portugal taking into account the most recently available reports from the Bank of Portugal
      regarding the Bank’s compliance with the Own Funds Requirements Regulations. The nominal
      amount so reduced will only be reinstated and recorded as a subordinated credit in certain specified
      circumstances. The potential reduction of the nominal amount will very likely negatively affect the
      market value of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes then outstanding and will increase the risk
      of capital loss under the investment in the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes, either in whole or in
      part, considering that such reduced amount will only be reinstated in certain circumstances.

      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes are undated securities and need not be redeemed by BES
      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes are undated securities in respect of which there is no fixed
      redemption or maturity date. BES is under no obligation to redeem the Undated Deeply Subordinated
      Notes at any time (and any redemption has to comply with the provisions of Condition 6 of the
      Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes (“Redemption and Purchase”) and, in any event, be subject to
      the prior approval of the Bank of Portugal). BES may only redeem the Undated Deeply Subordinated
      Notes within the five years subsequent to their issue date if: (i) the Bank of Portugal is of the opinion
      that the relevant Tranche of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes being redeemed is replaced with
      another Tranche which in the opinion of the Bank of Portugal satisfies at least the same requirements
      as the Redeemed Notes in terms of eligibility as Tier 1 capital of BES; (ii) the proceeds of the issue
      of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes cease to be eligible as Tier 1 Capital for BES; or (iii)
      certain tax events occur, in any case provided that the Bank of Portugal has previously approved such
      redemption. For further details see Condition 6 (“Redemption and Purchase”).

      The holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes have no right to require redemption of the
      Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes, except if a judgment is issued for the insolvent judicial
      liquidation of BES or if BES is wound up for any other reason. The holders of Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Notes have no right to file for the insolvent judicial liquidation of BES for reason of no
      payment of any amounts under the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes.

3.5   Risks relating to Interbolsa Notes

      Reliance upon Interbolsa procedures and Portuguese law
      Investments in Interbolsa Notes will be subject to Interbolsa procedures and Portuguese law with
      respect to the following:

      (a)    Form and Transfer of Interbolsa Notes
            Notes held through accounts of financial institutions, which are licensed to act as financial
            intermediaries and which are entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of their
            customers and which include any depository banks appointed by Euroclear and Clearstream,
            Luxembourg for the purpose of holding accounts on behalf of Euroclear and Clearstream,
            Luxembourg (each such institution an “Affiliate Member of Interbolsa’’) will be represented in
            book-entry form (forma escritural) and can be either registered notes (nominativas) or bearer
            notes (ao portador) as specified in the applicable Final Terms. Interbolsa Notes shall not be
            issued in definitive form, whether in definitive bearer form or otherwise. Interbolsa Notes will
            be registered in the relevant issue account opened by the Issuer with Interbolsa and will be held
            in control accounts by the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa on behalf of the relevant
            Noteholders. Such control accounts will reflect at all times the aggregate number of Interbolsa
            Notes held in the individual securities accounts opened by the clients of the Affiliate Members
            of Interbolsa (which may include Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg). The transfer of
            Interbolsa Notes and their beneficial interests will be made through Interbolsa.




                                                     32
(b)   Payments on Interbolsa Notes
      All payments on Interbolsa Notes (including without limitation the payment of accrued interest
      and principal) will be made by the Issuer to the Portuguese Paying Agent and (i) if made in
      euro will be (a) credited, according to the procedures and regulations of Interbolsa, by the
      Portuguese Paying Agent to the payment current-accounts held in the payment system of the
      Bank of Portugal by the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa whose control accounts with
      Interbolsa are credited with such Notes and thereafter (b) credited by such Interbolsa Affiliate
      Members from the aforementioned payment current-accounts to the accounts of the
      Noteholders or through Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to the accounts with
      Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners of those Notes, in accordance
      with the rules and procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case
      may be; (ii) if made in currencies other than euro will be (a) transferred, on the payment date
      and according to the procedures and regulations applicable by Interbolsa, from the account held
      by the Portuguese Paying Agent in the Foreign Currency Settlement System (Sistema de
      Liquidação em Moeda Estrangeira), managed by Caixa Geral de Depósitos, S.A., to the
      relevant accounts of the relevant Affiliate Members of Interbolsa, and thereafter (b) transferred
      by such Affiliate Members of Interbolsa from such relevant accounts to the accounts of the
      Noteholders of those Notes or through Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to the accounts
      with Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners of those Notes, in
      accordance with the rules and procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream,
      Luxembourg, as the case may be.

      The Issuer must provide Interbolsa with a prior notice of all payments in relation to the
      Interbolsa Notes and all necessary information for that purpose. In particular, such notice must
      contain:

      (a)   the identity of the Portuguese Paying Agent responsible for the relevant payment; and

      (b)   a statement of acceptance of such responsibility by the Portuguese Paying Agent.

      Interbolsa shall notify the Portuguese Paying Agent of the amounts to be settled, which
      Interbolsa calculates on the basis of the balances and on the tax rules governing the accounts
      of the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa.

      In the case of a partial payment, the amount held in the relevant current account of the
      Portuguese Paying Agent must be apportioned pro-rata between the accounts of the Affiliate
      Members of Interbolsa. After a payment has been processed, such process shall be confirmed
      to Interbolsa.

      The Noteholders must rely on the procedures of Interbolsa to receive payment under the
      Interbolsa Notes. The records relating to payments made in respect of beneficial interests in the
      Interbolsa Notes are maintained by the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa and the Issuer accepts
      no responsibility for, and will not be liable in respect of, the maintenance of such records.

(c)   Portuguese Tax Rules
      Pursuant to Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November, 2005, as amended from time to time,
      investment income paid to holders of Interbolsa Notes, and capital gains derived from a sale or
      other disposition of such Notes, will be exempt from Portuguese income tax only if certain
      documentation requirements are duly complied with.

      If the Notes are held in an account with an international clearing system (such as Euroclear or
      Clearstream, Luxembourg), the management entity of such clearing system may not provide
      the necessary registration services in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, and, therefore, to be
      eligible for the exemption, the holders of the Interbolsa Notes are required to submit to the
      management entity of the relevant clearing system, by courier, hand delivery or mail (there is
      no procedure for electronic filing), on an annual basis:



                                              33
             (i)    a certificate with the name of each beneficial owner, address, tax payer number (if
                    applicable), the identity of the securities, the quantity held and also the reference to the
                    legislation supporting the exemption or the waiver of Portuguese withholding tax; or

             (ii)   a declaration that the beneficial owners are exempt from, or not subject to, Portuguese
                    withholding tax.

             The certificate and declaration are set out in “Taxation in Portugal (including Madeira)” on
             page 261 hereto.

The Issuer will not gross up payments in respect of any such withholding tax in any of the cases
indicated in Condition 8 of the Interbolsa Notes, including failure to deliver or incorrect filling of the
certificate or declaration referred to above. Accordingly, holders of Interbolsa Notes must seek their
own advice to ensure that they comply with all procedures to ensure correct tax treatment of their
Interbolsa Notes.

3.6   Risks related to the market generally
      Set out below is a brief description of the principal market risks, including liquidity risk, exchange
      rate risk, interest rate risk and credit risk:

      The secondary market generally
      Notes may have no established trading market when issued, and one may never develop. If a market
      does develop, it may not be very liquid. Therefore, investors may not be able to sell their Notes easily
      or at prices that will provide them with a yield comparable to similar investments that have a
      developed secondary market. This is particularly the case for Notes that are especially sensitive to
      interest rate, currency or market risks, are designed for specific investment objectives or strategies or
      have been structured to meet the investment requirements of limited categories of investors. These
      types of Notes generally would have a more limited secondary market and more price volatility than
      conventional debt securities. Illiquidity may have a severely adverse effect on the market value of
      Notes.

      Exchange rate risks and exchange controls
      The Issuer will pay principal and interest on the Notes and the Guarantor will make any payments
      under the Guarantee in the Specified Currency. This presents certain risks relating to currency
      conversions if an investor’s financial activities are denominated principally in a currency or currency
      unit (the “Investor’s Currency”) other than the Specified Currency. These include the risk that
      exchange rates may significantly change (including changes due to devaluation of the Specified
      Currency or revaluation of the Investor’s Currency) and the risk that authorities with jurisdiction over
      the Investor’s Currency may impose or modify exchange controls. An appreciation in the value of the
      Investor’s Currency relative to the Specified Currency would decrease (1) the Investor’s Currency-
      equivalent yield on the Notes, (2) the Investor’s Currency-equivalent value of the principal payable on
      the Notes and (3) the Investor’s Currency-equivalent market value of the Notes.

      Government and monetary authorities may impose (as some have done in the past) exchange controls
      that could adversely affect an applicable exchange rate. As a result, investors may receive less interest
      or principal than expected, or no interest or principal.

      Interest rate risks
      Investment in Fixed Rate Notes involves the risk that subsequent changes in market interest rates may
      adversely affect the value of the Fixed Rate Notes.

      Credit ratings may not reflect all risks
      One or more independent credit rating agencies may assign credit ratings to the Notes. The ratings
      may not reflect the potential impact of all risks related to structure, market, additional factors



                                                      34
      discussed above, and other factors that may affect the value of the Notes. A credit rating is not a
      recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be revised or withdrawn by the rating agency
      at any time.

3.7   Legal investment considerations may restrict certain investments
      The investment activities of certain investors are subject to legal investment laws and regulations, or
      review or regulation by certain authorities. Each potential investor should consult its legal advisers to
      determine whether and to what extent (1) Notes are legal investments for it, (2) Notes can be used as
      collateral for various types of borrowing and (3) other restrictions apply to its purchase or pledge of
      any Notes. Financial institutions should consult their legal advisors or the appropriate regulators to
      determine the appropriate treatment of Notes under any applicable risk-based capital or similar rules.




                                                     35
               GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAMME
Under the Programme, the Issuers may from time to time issue Notes denominated in any currency agreed
between the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer, subject as set out herein. A summary of the terms and
conditions of the Programme and the Notes is set out in “Summary of the Programme” above. The applicable
terms of any Notes will be agreed between the Issuer and the relevant Dealer prior to the issue of the Notes
and will be set out either in the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
Subordinated Notes)” or in the “Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes” endorsed
on, attached to, or incorporated by reference into, the Notes, as modified by Part A of the applicable Final
Terms attached to, endorsed on or incorporated by reference into such Notes, as more fully described under
“Form of the Notes” below.

This Prospectus and any supplement to this Prospectus will only be valid for listing Notes on the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange, or any other stock exchange in the European Economic Area, in an aggregate
nominal amount which, when added to the aggregate nominal amount then outstanding of all Notes
previously or simultaneously issued under the Programme, does not exceed €20,000,000,000 or its
equivalent in other currencies. For the purpose of calculating the euro equivalent of the aggregate nominal
amount of Notes issued under the Programme from time to time:

(a)   the euro equivalent of Notes denominated in another Specified Currency (as specified in the
      applicable Final Terms in relation to the relevant Notes, described under “Applicable Final Terms”)
      shall be determined, at the discretion of the Issuer, either as of the date on which agreement is reached
      for the issue of Notes or on the preceding day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange
      markets are open for general business in London and Lisbon, in each case on the basis of the spot rate
      for the sale of the euro against the purchase of such Specified Currency in the London foreign
      exchange market quoted by any leading international bank selected by the Issuer on the relevant day
      of calculation;

(b)   the euro equivalent of Dual Currency Notes, Index Linked Notes and Partly Paid Notes (each as
      specified in the applicable Final Terms in relation to the relevant Notes, described under “Form of the
      Notes”) shall be calculated in the manner specified above by reference to the original nominal amount
      on issue of such Notes (in the case of Partly Paid Notes, regardless of the subscription price paid); and

(c)   the euro equivalent of Zero Coupon Notes (as specified in the applicable Final Terms in relation to the
      relevant Notes, described under “Form of the Notes”) and other Notes issued at a discount or a
      premium shall be calculated in the manner specified above by reference to the net proceeds received
      by the Issuer for the relevant issue.




                                                     36
                                                                                                               A4.3.1
                DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE                                                            A4.13.1
                                                                                                               A4.13.4.1
The following documents which have been filed with the CSSF shall be incorporated in, and form part of,        A4.13.5.1
                                                                                                               A4.13.5.2
this Prospectus. Information contained in the documents incorporated by reference other than information       A11.11.1
listed in the table below is given for information purposes only.                                              A11.11.2
                                                                                                               A11.4.1
(a)   The press release of the Bank dated 2nd November, 2010 entitled “Banco Espírito Santo Group              A11.11.5.1
      Activity and Results in 9H10” presenting the unaudited consolidated financial results for the period     A11.11.5.2
                                                                                                               A11.13.1
      ended 30th September, 2010 comprising the balance sheet (page 37) and the statement of income
      (page 38).

(b)   The unaudited interim financial statements of BES Finance for the six months ended 30th June, 2010
      as set out in the Financial Statements and notes to the financial statements for the period ended
      30th June, 2010 and 31st December, 2009, comprising the statement of financial position (page 4),
      the income statement (page 2) the statement of changes in equity (page 5), the statement of cash flows
      (page 6) and the notes of financial statements (pages 7 to 35).

(c)   The auditors’ report and audited annual financial statements of BES Finance for the financial year
      ended 31st December, 2009, as set out in BES Finance’s Financial Statements and Notes to the
      Financial Statements for the years ended 31st December, 2009 and 2008, including:

      (i)     income statement (page 2);

      (ii)    balance sheet (page 4);

      (iii)   cashflow statements (page 6);

      (iv)    accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 7 to 54); and

      (v)     auditors’ report (pages 55-56).

(d)   The auditors’ report and audited annual financial statements of BES Finance for the financial year       A4.3.1

      ended 31st December, 2008, as set out in BES Finance’s Financial Statements and Notes to the
      Financial Statements for the years ended 31st December, 2008 and 2007, including:

      (i)     income statement (page 3);

      (ii)    balance sheet (page 2);

      (iii)   cashflow statements (page 5);

      (iv)    accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 6 to 40); and

      (v)     auditors’ report (page 1).

(e)   The unaudited consolidated and non-consolidated interim financial statements of the Bank for the six
      months ended 30th June, 2010, as set out on pages 51 to 173 of the 2010 Interim Report, including:

      (i)     statements of income (pages 52, 54, 56 and 57);

      (ii)    balance sheet (pages 51, 53 and 58);

      (iii)   cashflow statements (page 60);

      (iv)    accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 61 to 171); and

      (v)     auditors’ report (pages 172-173]).

(f)   The auditors’ report and audited consolidated and non-consolidated annual financial statements of the
      Bank for the financial year ended 31st December, 2009, as set out on pages 66-175 of the 2009 Annual
      Report, including:



                                                     37
      (i)     statements of income (pages 67, 69, 74 and 75);

      (ii)    balance sheet (pages 66, 68 and 76);

      (iii)   cashflow statements (page 78);

      (iv)    accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 74-170); and

      (v)     auditors’ reports (pages 173-174).

(g)   The auditors’ report and audited consolidated and non-consolidated annual financial statements of the      A11.11.1

      Bank for the financial year ended 31st December, 2008, as set out on pages 67 to 251 of the 2008           A11.11.2

      Annual Report, including:
      (i)     statements of income (pages 69, 71, 165 and 167);
      (ii)    balance sheet (pages 70, 72, 166 and 168);
      (iii)   cashflow statements (pages 74 and 170);
      (iv)    accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 75 to 163 and 171 to 241); and
      (v)     auditors’ reports (pages 245 to 248).

All information included in the 2009 and 2008 Annual Reports and in the interim financial statements of BES
Finance and the Bank but not expressly identified above is provided for information purposes only.

Following the publication of this Prospectus a supplement to this Prospectus may be prepared by the relevant
Issuer and approved by the CSSF in accordance with Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive. Statements
contained in any such supplement to this Prospectus (or contained in any document incorporated by
reference therein) shall, to the extent applicable (whether expressly, by implication or otherwise), be deemed
to modify or supersede statements contained in this Prospectus or in a document which is incorporated by
reference in this Prospectus. Any statement so modified or superseded shall not, except as so modified or
superseded, constitute a part of this Prospectus.

Copies of documents incorporated by reference in this Prospectus can be obtained from the registered office
of the relevant Issuer and from the specified office of the Paying Agent for the time being in Luxembourg.

In addition, such documents will be published on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s web site
(www.bourse.lu).

BES Finance and the Bank will, in the event of any significant new factor, material mistake or inaccuracy
relating to information included in this Prospectus which is capable of affecting the assessment of any Notes,
prepare a supplement to this Prospectus or publish a new Prospectus for use in connection with any
subsequent issue of Notes.




                                                      38
                                              FORM OF THE NOTES

1.        Bearer Notes
Each Tranche of Notes (not applicable to Interbolsa Notes) will be initially represented by a temporary
global Note without receipts, interest coupons or talons, which on issue will:

(i)       if the temporary global Note is intended to be issued in new global note (“NGN”) form, as stated in
          the applicable Final Terms, be delivered on or prior to the original issue date of the relevant Tranche
          to a common safekeeper (the “Common Safekeeper”) outside the United States for Euroclear and
          Clearstream, Luxembourg; and

(ii)      if the temporary global Note is not intended to be issued in NGN form, as stated in the applicable
          Final Terms, be delivered on or prior to the original issue date of the relevant Tranche to a common
          depositary (the “Common Depositary”) outside the United States for Euroclear and Clearstream,
          Luxembourg.

Whilst any Note is represented by a temporary global Note, payments of principal and interest (if any) due
prior to the Exchange Date (as defined below) will be made outside the United States (against presentation
of the temporary global Note if the temporary global Note is not intended to be issued in NGN form) only
to the extent that certification (in a form to be provided) to the effect that the beneficial owners of interests
in such Note are not U.S. persons or persons who have purchased for resale to any U.S. person, as required
by U.S. Treasury regulations, has been received by Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg and
Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as applicable, has given a like certification (based on the
certifications it has received) to the Agent. Any reference in this section “Form of the Notes” to Euroclear
and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg shall, whenever the context so permits, be deemed to include a reference
to any additional or alternative clearing system approved by the Issuer, the Agent and the Trustee.

On and after the date (the “Exchange Date”) which is 40 days after the date on which any temporary global
Note is issued, interests in such temporary global Note unless otherwise specified in the applicable Final
Terms or the temporary global Note will be exchangeable (free of charge) upon a request as described therein
either for interests in a permanent global Note without receipts, interest coupons or talons or, subject to the
following proviso, for definitive Notes with, where applicable, receipts, interest coupons and talons attached
(as indicated in the applicable Final Terms and subject, in the case of definitive Notes, to such notice period
as is specified in the applicable Final Terms) in each case against certification of beneficial ownership as
described in the immediately preceding paragraph unless such certification has already been given; provided
that a temporary global Note representing Notes having denominations consisting of a minimum Specified
Denomination and one or more higher Specified Denominations which are not an integral amount of such
minimum Specified Denomination may only be exchanged for definitive Notes upon an Exchange Event (as
defined below). The holder of a temporary global Note will not be entitled to collect any payment of interest
or principal due on or after the Exchange Date unless upon due certification exchange of the temporary
global Note is improperly withheld or refused. Pursuant to the Principal Agency Agreement (as defined
under “Terms and Conditions of the Notes” below) the Agent shall arrange that, where a further Tranche of
Notes is issued, the Notes of such Tranche shall be assigned a common code and ISIN by Euroclear and
Clearstream, Luxembourg which are different from the common code and ISIN assigned to Notes of any
other Tranche of the same Series until at least 40 days (as notified by the Agent to the relevant Dealer) after
the completion of the distribution of the Notes of such Tranche.

Payments of principal and interest (if any) on a permanent global Note will be made through Euroclear
and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg (against presentation or surrender (as the case may be) of the permanent
global Note if the permanent global Note is not intended to be issued in NGN form) without any requirement
for certification. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable Final Terms, a permanent global Note will be
exchangeable (free of charge), in whole but not in part, for definitive Notes with, where applicable, receipts,

1      Delete as appropriate.
2      Include this legend where a non-exempt offer of Notes is anticipated.
3      Include this legend where only an-exempt offer of Notes is anticipated.


                                                                  39
interest coupons and talons attached upon not less than 60 days’ written notice to the Agent as described
therein, save that a permanent global Note representing Notes having denominations consisting of a
minimum Specified Denomination and one or more higher Specified Denominations which are not an
integral multiple of such minimum Specified Denomination may only be exchanged for definitive Notes
upon an Exchange Event. “Exchange Event” means that the Issuer and/or the Guarantor has been notified
that both Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg have been closed for business for a continuous period of
14 days (other than by reason of holiday, statutory or otherwise) or have announced an intention permanently
to cease business or have in fact done so and no alternative clearance system satisfactory to the Trustee is
available. The Issuer shall promptly give notice to the Noteholders in accordance with the Terms and
Conditions if an Exchange Event occurs. Global Notes and definitive Notes will be issued pursuant to the
Principal Agency Agreement.

The following legend will appear on all bearer Notes which have an original maturity of more than 365 days
and on all receipts, interest coupons and talons relating to such Notes:

“Any United States person who holds this obligation will be subject to limitations under the United States
income tax laws, including the limitations provided in Sections 165(j) and 1287(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code.”

The sections referred to provide that United States holders, with certain exceptions, will not be entitled to
deduct any loss on Notes, receipts or interest coupons and will not be entitled to capital gains treatment of
any gain on any sale, disposition, redemption or payment of principal in respect of Notes, receipts or interest
coupons.

2.      Interbolsa Notes
Notes held through Interbolsa – Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados
de Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa”) (each an “Interbolsa Note”) will be represented in book-entry
(“forma escritural”) form and can be either a registered Note (“nominativas”) or a bearer Note (“ao
portador”), as specified in the applicable Final Terms.

Title to Interbolsa Notes will be evidenced by book-entries in accordance with the Portuguese Securities
Code and the regulations issued by Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários (Portuguese Securities
Market Commission, the “CMVM”), by Interbolsa or otherwise applicable thereto. Each person shown in
the book-entry records of a financial institution, which is licensed to act as a financial intermediary and
which is entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of their customers and which includes
any depository banks appointed by Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg for the purpose of holding
accounts on behalf of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg (each such institution an “Affiliate Member
of Interbolsa”), as having an interest in the Interbolsa Notes shall be the holder of the principal amount of
the Interbolsa Notes recorded.

Title to the Interbolsa Notes is subject to compliance with all rules, restrictions and requirements applicable
to the activities of Interbolsa and to Portuguese law.

One or more certificates in relation to the Interbolsa Notes (each, a “Certificate”) will be delivered by the
relevant financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual securities accounts in
respect of a registered holding of Interbolsa Notes upon the request by the relevant Noteholder and in
accordance with that financial intermediary’s procedures pursuant to article 78 of the Portuguese Securities
Code.

The Interbolsa Notes will be registered in the relevant control issue account of the Issuer with Interbolsa and
will be held in control accounts by each Affiliate Member of Interbolsa on behalf of the Noteholders. Such
control accounts will reflect at all times the aggregate number of Interbolsa Notes held in individual
securities accounts opened with the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa by Noteholders, which are clients of the
Affiliate Members of Interbolsa and include Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.


1    Delete as appropriate


                                                      40
The person or entity registered in the relevant individual securities accounts of an Affiliate Member of
Interbolsa (the “Book-Entry Registry” and each such entry therein, a “Book Entry”) as the holder of any
Interbolsa Note shall (except as otherwise required by law) be treated as its absolute owner for all purposes
(whether or not it is overdue and regardless of any notice of ownership, trust or any other interest therein).

The Issuer and the Paying Agents may (to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law) deem and treat the
person or entity registered in the Book-Entry Registry as the holder of any Interbolsa Note and the absolute
owner for all purposes. Proof of such registration is made by means of a Certificate issued by the relevant
financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual securities accounts pursuant to
article 78 of the Portuguese Securities Code.

No Noteholder will be able to transfer Interbolsa Notes, or any interest therein, except in accordance with
Portuguese law and regulations. Interbolsa Notes may only be transferred in accordance with the applicable
procedures established by the Portuguese Securities Code and the regulations issued by the CMVM and
Interbolsa.




                                                     41
                                 APPLICABLE FINAL TERMS
Set out below is the form of Final Terms which will be completed for each Tranche of Notes issued under
the Programme with a denomination of less than €50,000 (or its equivalent in another currency).

[Date]

                          [BES FINANCE LTD./BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                    (acting through its [head office]/[Madeira Free Trade Zone branch]
                               /[Cayman Islands branch] /[London branch])

                     Issue of [Aggregate Nominal Amount of Tranche] [Title of Notes]
                                [Guaranteed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                    [acting through London branch]]1
                                        under the €20,000,000,000
                                  Euro Medium Term Note Programme

[The Prospectus referred to below (as completed by these Final Terms) has been prepared on the basis that,
except as provided in sub-paragraph (ii) below, any offer of Notes in any Member State of the European
Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus Directive (2003/71/EC) (each, a “Relevant Member
State”) will be made pursuant to an exemption under the Prospectus Directive, as implemented in that
Relevant Member State, from the requirement to publish a prospectus for offers of the Notes. Accordingly
any person making or intending to make an offer of the Notes may only do so:

(i)      in circumstances in which no obligation arises for the Issuer or any Dealer to publish a prospectus
         pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article 16 of
         the Prospectus Directive, in each case, in relation to such offer; or

(ii)     in those Public Offer Jurisdictions mentioned in Paragraph 36 of Part A below, provided such person
         is one of the persons mentioned in Paragraph 36 of Part A below and that such offer is made during
         the Offer Period specified for such purpose therein.

Neither the Issuer nor any Dealer has authorised, nor do they authorise, the making of any offer of Notes in
any other circumstances]2.

[The Prospectus referred to below (as completed by these Final Terms) has been prepared on the basis that
any offer of Notes in any Member State of the European Economic Area which has implemented the
Prospectus Directive (2003/71/EC) (each, a “Relevant Member State”) will be made pursuant to an
exemption under the Prospectus Directive, as implemented in that Relevant Member State, from the
requirement to publish a prospectus for offers of the Notes. Accordingly any person making or intending to
make an offer in that Relevant Member State of the Notes may only do so in circumstances in which no
obligation arises for the Issuer or any Dealer to publish a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus
Directive or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive, in each case, in
relation to such offer. Neither the Issuer nor any Dealer has authorised, nor do they authorise, the making of
any offer of Notes in any other circumstances]3.

                                    PART A – CONTRACTUAL TERMS
Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the [“Terms and Conditions of
the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”/“Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply
Subordinated Notes”] (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the Prospectus dated [date] [and the
supplement to the Prospectus dated [date]] which [together] constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes
of the Prospectus Directive (Directive 2003/71/EC) (the “Prospectus Directive”). This document constitutes
the Final Terms of the Notes described herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus Directive and
must be read in conjunction with the Prospectus [as so supplemented]. Full information on the Issuer[, the
Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only available on the basis of the combination of these Final Terms
and the Prospectus [as so supplemented]. The Prospectus [and the supplement to the Prospectus] [is/are]



                                                       42
available for viewing at [address] and [website] and copies may be obtained during normal business hours
from [address].

[The following alternative language applies if the first tranche of an issue which is being increased was
issued under a Prospectus (or equivalent) with an earlier date.

Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the [“Terms and Conditions of
the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”/“Terms and Conditions of the Deeply
Subordinated Notes”] (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the [Prospectus/Offering Circular] dated
[original date] [and the supplement to the Prospectus/Offering Circular dated [date]]. This document
constitutes the Final Terms of the Notes described herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus
Directive (Directive 2003/71/ EC) (the “Prospectus Directive”) and must be read in conjunction with the
Prospectus dated [current date] [and the supplement to the Prospectus dated [date]] which [together]
constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes of the Prospectus Directive, save in respect of the Terms and
Conditions which are extracted from the [Prospectus/ Offering Circular] dated [original date] [and the
supplement[s] to the [Offering Circular and the] [Prospectuses]] and are attached hereto. Full information on
the Issuer[, the Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only available on the basis of the combination of
these Final Terms and the Prospectus dated [current date] [as so supplemented] and the [Prospectus/Offering
Circular] dated [original date] [as so supplemented]. Copies of the [Offering Circular and the]
Prospectus[es] [as so supplemented] are available for viewing at [address] [and] [website] and copies may
be obtained during normal business hours from [address].

[Include whichever of the following apply or specify as “Not Applicable” (N/A). Note that the numbering
should remain as set out below, even if “Not Applicable” is indicated for individual paragraphs or
subparagraphs. Italics denote directions for completing the Final Terms.]

[When adding any other final terms or information consideration should be given as to whether such terms
or information constitute “significant new factors” and consequently trigger the need for a supplement to
the Prospectus under Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.]

[In respect of Notes issued by BES Finance Ltd. which have a maturity of less than one year, the minimum
denomination may need to be £100,000 or its equivalent in any other currency.]

1.    Issuer:                               [BES Finance Ltd./Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (acting through           A12.1.1.1

                                            its [head office]/[Madeira Free Trade Zone branch]/ [Cayman
                                            Islands branch]/[London branch])]1

      [Guarantor:                           Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (acting through its London branch)]1

2.    Series Number:                        [•]

      [Tranche Number:                      [•]

                                            (If fungible with an existing Series, details of that Series,
                                            including the date on which the Notes become fungible)]

3.    Specified Currency or Currencies:     [•]                                                                    A5.4.4
                                                                                                                   A12.4.1.5
4.    Aggregate Nominal Amount:

      – Series:                             [•]

      –Tranche:                             [•]                                                                    A5.5.1.2
                                                                                                                   A12.5.1.2
                                                                                                                   A5.5.3.1
5.    Issue Price of Tranche:               [•] per cent. of the Aggregate Nominal Amount [plus accrued            A12.5.3
                                            interest from [insert date] (in the case of fungible issues only, if
                                            applicable)]




                                                     43
6.    (i)   Specified Denominations:      [•]

                                          (N.B. If an issue of Notes is (i) NOT admitted to trading on a
                                          European Economic Area exchange; and (ii) only offered in the
                                          European Economic Area in circumstances where a prospectus
                                          is not required to be published under the Prospectus Directive
                                          the €1,000 minimum denomination is not required.)

      (ii) Calculation Amount:            [•]

                                          (If only one Specified Denomination, insert the Specified
                                          Denomination. If more than one Specified Denomination, insert
                                          the highest common factor. Note, there must be a common factor
                                          in the case of two or more Specified Denominations.)

7.    [(i)] Issue Date [and Interest      [•]                                                                A5.4.7.
                                                                                                             A5.4.12
            Commencement Date]:
                                                                                                             A12.4.1.9

      [(ii) Interest Commencement         [•]
            Date (if different from the
            Issue Date):

8.    Maturity Date:                      [Fixed rate – specify date/Floating rate where the Interest        A5.4.8
                                                                                                             A12.4.1.11
                                          Period and date(s) are adjusted or any other rate where the
                                          Interest Period end date(s) are adjusted – Interest Payment
                                          Date falling in or nearest to [specify month and year] [(the
                                          “Scheduled Maturity Date”), subject as provided in
                                          Condition 24(e)[, and] [Condition 24(f)] [and] [Condition 24(g)]
                                          [and] [Condition 24(h)] [and] [Condition 24(k)] of the “Terms
                                          and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
                                          Subordinated Notes)” (include for Credit Linked Notes as
                                          applicable: see below)]]

9.    Interest Basis:                     [[•] per cent. Fixed Rate]
                                          [[LIBOR/EURIBOR]+/- [•] per cent. Floating Rate]
                                          [Zero Coupon]
                                          [Index Linked Interest]
                                          [Dual Currency Interest]
                                          [specify other]
                                          (further particulars specified below)

10.   Redemption/Payment Basis:           [Redemption at par]                                                A5.4.8

                                          [Index Linked Redemption]
                                          [Dual Currency Redemption]
                                          [Partly Paid]
                                          [Instalment]
                                          [Credit Linked Redemption]
                                          [specify other]
                                          (N.B. If the Final Redemption Amount is other than 100 per
                                          cent. of the nominal value the Notes will be derivative
                                          securities for the purposes of the Prospectus Directive and the
                                          requirements of Annex XII to the Prospectus Directive
                                          Regulation will apply.)

11.   Change of Interest Basis or         [Specify details of any provision for change of Notes into
      Redemption/Payment Basis:           another Interest Basis or Redemption/Payment Basis]




                                                  44
12.   Put/Call Options:                   [Investor Put]
                                          [Issuer Call]
                                          (further particulars specified below)
13.   [(i)] Status of the Notes:          [Senior/Dated Subordinated/Undated Subordinated/Undated             A12.4.1.6
                                                                                                              A5.4.5
                                          Deeply Subordinated]
      [(ii) Status of the Guarantee:      [Senior/Dated Subordinated/Undated Subordinated]]1
                                                                                                              A5.4.11
      [(iii) [Date [Board] approval for   [•] [and [•], respectively]] (N.B. Only relevant where Board        A12.4.1.8
             issuance of Notes [and       (or similar) authorisation is required for the particular tranche
             Guarantee] obtained:         of Notes or related Guarantee)
14.   Method of distribution:             [Syndicated/Non-syndicated]

PROVISIONS RELATING TO INTEREST (IF ANY) PAYABLE
15.   Fixed Rate Note Provisions          [Applicable/Not Applicable]                                         A12.4.1.13

                                          (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                          paragraph)
      (i)   Rate[(s)] of Interest:        [•] per cent. per annum [payable [annually/semi-annually/
                                          quarterly/other (specify)] in arrear]
                                          (If payable other than annually, consider amending [Condition
                                          5(a) of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than
                                          Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”/Condition 4(a) of the
                                          “Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated
                                          Notes”, if applicable)]
      (ii) Interest Payment Date(s):      [[•] in each year up to and including the Maturity Date]/
                                          [specify other]
                                          (NB: This will need to be amended in the case of long or short
                                          coupons)

      (iii) Fixed Coupon Amount(s):       [•] per Calculation Amount

      (iv) Broken Amount(s):              [•] per Calculation Amount, payable on the Interest Payment
                                          Date falling [in/on] [•]

      (v) Day Count Fraction:             [Actual/Actual (ICMA) or 30/360 or specify other] (NB: if
                                          interest is not payable on a regular basis (for example, if there
                                          are Broken Amounts specified) Actual/Actual (ICMA) may not
                                          be a suitable Day Count Fraction)

      (vi) Determination Date(s):         [•] in each year
                                          [Insert interest payment dates except where there are long or
                                          short periods. In these cases, insert regular interest payment
                                          dates] (NB: Only relevant where Day Count Fraction is
                                          Actual/ Actual (ICMA))

      (vii) Other terms relating to the   [None/Give details]
            method of calculating
            interest for Fixed Rate
            Notes:
16.   Floating Rate Note Provisions       [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                          (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                          paragraph)

      (i)   Specified Period(s)/Specified [•]
            Interest Payment Dates:


                                                   45
(ii) Business Day Convention:        [Floating Rate Convention/Following Business Day
                                     Convention/Modified Following Business Day Convention/
                                     Preceding Business Day Convention/[specify other]]

(iii) Additional Business Centre(s): [•]

(iv) Manner in which the Rate of     [Screen Rate Determination/ISDA Determination/specify other
     Interest and Interest Amount
     is to be determined:

(v) Party responsible for        [•]
    calculating the Rate of
    Interest and Interest Amount
    (if not the Agent):

(vi) Screen Rate Determination:

       – Reference Rate:             [•]
                                     (Either LIBOR, EURIBOR or other, although additional
                                     information is required if other – including fallback provisions
                                     in the Agency Agreement

       – Interest Determination      [•]
         Date(s):                    (Second day on which commercial banks are open for general
                                     business (including dealings in foreign exchange and foreign
                                     currency deposits) in London prior to the start of each Interest
                                     Period if LIBOR (other than sterling or euro LIBOR), first day
                                     of each Interest Period if sterling LIBOR and the second day
                                     on which the TARGET2 System is open prior to the start of
                                     each Interest Period if EURIBOR or euro LIBOR)
       – Relevant Screen Page:       [•]
                                     (In the case of EURIBOR, if not Reuters EURIBOR01 ensure it
                                     is a page which shows a composite rate or amend the fallback
                                     provisions approximately)

(vii) If ISDA Determination:

–      Floating Rate Option:         [•]

–      Designated Maturity:          [•]

–      Reset Date:                   [•]

(viii) Margin(s):                    [+/7] [•] per cent. per annum

(ix)    Minimum Rate of Interest:    [•] per cent. per annum

(x)     Maximum Rate of Interest:    [•] per cent. per annum

(xi)    Day Count Fraction:          [Actual/Actual (ISDA)
                                     Actual/365 (Fixed)
                                     Actual/365 (Sterling)
                                     Actual/360
                                     30/360
                                     30E/360
                                     30E/360 (ISDA)
                                     Other]
                                     (See 5(b)(iv) for alternatives)




                                              46
      (xii) Fallback provisions,             [•]
            rounding provisions and
            any other terms relating to
            the method of calculating
            interest on Floating Rate
            Notes, if different from
            those set out in the Terms
            and Conditions:

17.   Zero Coupon Note Provisions            [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                             (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                             paragraph)

      (i)     Accrual Yield:                 [•] per cent. per annum

      (ii)    Reference Price:               [•]

      (iii)   Any other formula/basis of     [•]
              determining amount             (Consider applicable day count fraction if euro denominated)
              payable:

      (iv)    Day Count Fraction in          [Conditions 7(e)(iii) and 7(j) apply/specify other]
              relation to Early
              Redemption amounts and
              late payment:

18.   Index Linked Interest Note             [Applicable/Not applicable]
      Provisions                             (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                             paragraph)

      (i)     Index/Formula:                 [give or annex details]                                           A12.5.4.5
                                                                                                               A5.4.7
      (ii)    Calculation Agent:             [give name and address]

      (iii)   Party responsible for          [give name and address]
              calculating the Rate of
              Interest (if not the
              Calculation Agent) and
              Interest Amount (if not the
              Agent):

      (iv)    Provisions for determining [need to include a description of market disruption or                A12.4.2.3
                                                                                                               A12.4.2.4
              Coupon where calculation     settlement disruption events and adjustment provisions]
                                                                                                               A5.4.7
              by reference to Index and/or [•]                                                                 A12.4.1.12
              Formula is impossible or
              impracticable:


      (v)     Specified                      [•]
              Period(s)/Specified Interest
              Payment Dates:

      (vi)    Business Day Convention:       [Floating Rate Convention/Following Business Day
                                             Convention/Modified Following Business Day Convention/
                                             Preceding Business Day Convention/specify other]
      (vii) Additional Business              [•]
            Centre(s):

      (viii) Minimum Rate of Interest:       [•] per cent. per annum


                                                      47
      (ix)    Maximum Rate of Interest:     [•] per cent. per annum

      (x)     Day Count Fraction:           [•]

19.   Dual Currency Interest Note           [Applicable/Not Applicable]
      Provisions                            (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                            paragraph)

      (i)     Rate of Exchange/method       [give or annex details]
              of calculating Rate of
              Exchange:

      (ii)    Party, if any, responsible for [give name and address]                                             A12.5.4.5
                                                                                                                 A5.4.7
              calculating the principal
              and/or interest due (if not
              the Agent):

      (iii)   Provisions applicable where [need to include a description of market disruption or settlement      A12.4.2.3
                                                                                                                 A12.4.2.4
              calculation by reference to disruption events and adjustment provisions]
              Rate of Exchange            [•]
              impossible or
              impracticable:

      (iv)    Person at whose option        [•]
              Specified Currency(ies) is/
              are payable:

PROVISIONS RELATING TO REDEMPTION
20.   Issuer Call:                          [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                            (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                            paragraph)

      (i)       Optional Redemption         [•]
                Date(s):
      (ii)      Optional Redemption         [•] per Calculation Amount
                Amount(s) and method,
                if any, of calculating of
                such amount(s):

      (iii)     If redeemable in part:
                (a)    Minimum              [•]
                       Redemption
                       Amount:
                (b)    Higher               [•]
                       Redemption
                       Amount:
      (iv)      Notice period (if other     [•]
                than as set out in the      (N.B. If setting notice periods which are different to those
                Terms and Conditions):      provided in the Terms and Conditions, the Issuer is advised to
                                            consider the practicalities of distribution of information through
                                            intermediaries, for example, clearing systems and custodians, as
                                            well as any other notice requirements which may apply, for
                                            example, as between the Issuer and the Agent or Trustee)




                                                     48
21.   Investor Put:                        [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                           (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                           paragraph)

      (i)     Optional Redemption Date(s): [•]

      (ii) Optional Redemption             [•] per Calculation Amount
           Amount(s) and method, if
           any, of calculating of such
           amount(s):

      (iii) Notice period (if other than   [•]
            as set out in the Terms and    (N.B. If setting notice periods which are different to those
            Conditions):                   provided in the Terms and Conditions, the Issuer is advised to
                                           consider the practicalities of distribution of information through
                                           intermediaries, for example, clearing systems and custodians, as
                                           well as any other notice requirements which may apply, for
                                           example, as between the Issuer and the Agent or Trustee)
22.   Final Redemption Amount:             [[•] per Calculation Amount/specify other/see Appendix/see
                                           item 24(i) below]
                                           (N.B. If the Final Redemption Amount is other than 100 per cent.
                                           of the nominal value the Notes will be derivative securities for
                                           the purposes of the Prospectus Directive and the requirements
                                           of Annex XII to the Prospectus Directive Regulation will apply.)
23.   Early Redemption Amount(s)           [[•] per Calculation Amount/specify other/see Appendix]
      payable on redemption for            (N.B. Specify the basis for determing the Early Redemption
      taxation reasons or on event of      Amount in the case of Credit Linked Notes)
      default [or under Condition 24(l)
      or under Condition 24(m) if a
      Substitute Reference Obligation
      has not been identified and/or the
      method of calculating the same (if
      required or if different from that
      set out in Condition 7(e))]:


24.   Credit Linked Note Provisions:       [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                           (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                           paragraph)
                                           (Consider whether definitions included in “Terms and
                                           Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
                                           Subordinated Notes)” are up to date)

      General

      (i)      Final Redemption Amount:    [•] per Calculation Amount

      (ii)     Settlement Method:          [Auction Settlement/Cash Settlement/Physical Delivery]
                                           [If Auction Settlement:
                                           The provisions of Condition 24(b) shall apply]
                                           [If Cash Settlement:
                                           The provisions of Condition 24(c) shall apply]
                                           [If Physical Delivery:
                                           The Provisions of Condition 24(d) shall apply]

      (iii)    Trade Date:                 [•]


                                                    49
(iv)   Scheduled Termination        [The day falling five] Business Days prior to the Scheduled
       Date:                        Maturity Date/specify other]

(v)    Calculation Agent            [give name and address]
       responsible for making
       calculations and
       determinations pursuant to
       Condition 24:

(vi)   Calculation Agent City:      [•]

Credit Provisions

(vii) Reference Entity(ies):        [•]

(viii) Reference Obligation(s):     [•]
       [The obligation[s]
       identified as follows:
       Primary Obligor:             [•]
       Guarantor:                   [•]
       Maturity:                    [•]
       Coupon:                      [•]
       CUSIP/ISIN:                  [•]]

(ix)   All Guarantees:              [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                    – Provisions relating to Qualifying Guarantee and Underlying
                                      Obligation: Condition 24(q) [Applicable/Not Applicable]

(x)    Credit Events:               [Bankruptcy]
                                    [Failure to Pay]
                                    [Grace Period Extension (Condition 24(f)) [Applicable/Not
                                    Applicable]
                                    [If Applicable:
                                    Grace Period: [•]]
                                    [Obligation Acceleration]
                                    [Obligation Default]
                                    [Repudiation/Moratorium]
                                    [Maturity Date Extension: Condition 24(h): [Applicable/Not
                                    Applicable]]
                                    [Restructuring]
                                    – Provisions relating to Restructuring Credit Event: Condition
                                        24(n) [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                    – Provisions relating to Multiple Holder Obligation: Condition
                                        24(o) [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                    – [Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable
                                        Obligation [Applicable/Not Applicable]]
                                    – [Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and
                                        Conditionally Transferable Obligation [Applicable/Not
                                        Applicable]]
                                    [other]

       Default Requirement:         [•]

       Payment Requirement:         [•]

(xi)   Conditions to Settlement:    Notice of Publicly Available Information [Applicable/Not
                                    Applicable]
                                    [If Applicable:


                                            50
                                      Public Source(s): [•]]
                                      (If other than in the definition in Condition 24(j)) Specified
                                      Number: [•]]
                                      (If none specified, then it is deemed to be two.)

(xii) Obligation(s):

       Obligation Category (select    [Payment] [Borrowed Money] [Reference Obligations Only]
       one only):                     [Bond]
                                      [Loan]
                                      [Bond or Loan]

       Obligation Characteristics     [Not Subordinated] [Specified Currency:
       (select all of which apply):   [specify currency] [Standard Specified Currencies]
                                      [Not Sovereign Lender]
                                      [Not Domestic Currency:]
                                      [Domestic Currency means: [specify currency]]
                                      [Not Domestic Law]
                                      [Listed]
                                      [Not Domestic Issuance]

       Additional Obligation(s):      [•]

(xiii) Provisions relating to         Condition 24(p) [Applicable/Not Applicable]
       Monoline Insurer to
       Reference Entity:
(xiv) Excluded Obligation(s):         [•]

(xv)   Accrual of Interest upon       [Applicable/Not Applicable]
       Credit Event:

(xvi) Merger Event: Condition         [Applicable/Not Applicable]
      24(l):

       Applicable: Merger Event       [•]
       Redemption Date:

(xvii) [Unwind Costs:                 [Standard Unwind Costs/other/Not Applicable]]

Terms relating to Cash Settlement [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                  (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                  paragraph)
(xviii) Credit Event Redemption       [[•] per Calculation Amount/As provided in Condition 24(m)]
        Amount:

(xix) Credit Event Redemption         [•] Business Days
      Date:

(xx)   Valuation Date:                [Single Valuation Date:
                                      [•] Business Days]
                                      [Multiple Valuation Dates:
                                      [•] Business Days; and each [•] Business Days thereafter
                                      Number of Valuation Dates: [•]]

(xxi) Valuation Time:                 [•]

(xxii) Quotation Method:              [Bid/Offer/Mid-market]

(xxiii) Quotation Amount:             [[•]/Representative Amount]


                                              51
(xxiv) [Minimum Quotation              [•]]
       Amount:

(xxv) Quotation Dealers:               [•]

(xxvi) Quotations:                     [Include Accrued Interest/Exclude Accrued Interest]

(xxvii) Valuation Method:              [Market/Highest]
                                       [Average Market/Highest/Average Highest]
                                       [Blended Market/Blended Highest]
                                       [Average Blended Market/Average Blended Highest]

(xxviii) Other terms or special        [•]
         conditions:

Terms relating to Physical Delivery [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                    paragraph)
(xxix)   Physical Settlement Period: [•] Business Days

(xxx)    Asset Amount:                 [Include Accrued Interest/Exclude Accrued Interest]

(xxxi) Settlement Currency:            [•]

(xxxii) Deliverable Obligations:

         Deliverable Obligation        [Payment] [Borrowed Money]
         Category (select one          [Reference Obligations Only]
         only):                        [Bond]
                                       [Loan]
                                       [Bond or Loan]

         Deliverable Obligation        [Not Subordinated] [Specified Currency:
         Characteristics (select all   [specify currency] [Standard Specified Currencies]
         of which apply):              [Not Sovereign Lender]
                                       [Not Domestic Currency]
                                       [Domestic Currency means: [specify currency]]
                                       [Not Domestic Law]
                                       [Listed]
                                       [Not Contingent]
                                       [Not Domestic Issuance]
                                       [Assignable Loan]
                                       [Consent Required Loan]
                                       [Direct Loan Participation]
                                       [Qualifying Participation Seller: – insert details]
                                       [Transferable]
                                       [Maximum Maturity: [•]]
                                       [Accelerated or Matured]
                                       [Not Bearer]

         Additional Deliverable        [•]
         Obligation(s):

(xxxiii) Excluded Deliverable          [•]
         Obligation(s):

(xxxiv) Indicative Quotations:         [Applicable/Not Applicable]

(xxxv) Cut-Off Date:                   [•]


                                               52
      (xxxvi) Delivery provisions for       [•]
              Asset Amount (including
              details of who is to make
              such delivery) if different
              from Terms and
              Conditions:
      (xxxvii) Other terms or special       [•]
               conditions:

      Additional terms relating to
      Auction Settlement:
      (xxxviii) Fallback Settlement         [Cash Settlement/Physical Delivery] [If Physical Delivery: The
                Method:                     provisions of Condition 24(i) shall apply]

      (xxxix) Additional Business           [•]
              Centre(s):
      (xl)        Business Day Convention [Following/Modified Following/Preceding]
                  for purposes of
                  Condition 24:

      (xli)       Succession Event         [Yes/No]
                  Backstop Date subject to
                  adjustment in accordance
                  with Business Day
                  Convention:

      (xlii)      Limitation Dates subject [Yes/No]
                  to adjustment in
                  accordance with Business
                  Day Convention:

GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE NOTES
25.   (i)      Form of Notes:               [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for a Permanent Global           A12.4.1.4

                                            Note which is exchangeable for Definitive Notes [on not less         A5.4.3

                                            than 60 days’ notice given at any time]/[only upon an
                                            Exchange Event].]
                                            [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for Definitive Notes on
                                            and after the Exchange Date.]
                                            [Book-entry form registered Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]
                                            [Book-entry form bearer Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]
                                            [Notes shall not be physically delivered in Belgium, except to a
                                            clearing system, a depository or other institution for the purpose
                                            of their immobilisation in accordance with article 4 of the
                                            Belgian Law of 14th December, 2005.]
      (ii) New Global Note:                 [Yes/No]
26.   Additional Financial Centre(s) or [Not Applicable/give details]
      other special provisions relating to
                                           (Note that this item relates to the place of payment and not
      Payment Days:
                                           Interest Period end dates to which sub-paragraphs 16 (iii) and
                                           18 (vii) relate)




                                                     53
27.   Talons for future Coupons or        [Yes/No. If yes, give details]
      Receipts to be attached to
      Definitive Notes (and dates on
      which such Talons mature):

28.   Details relating to Partly Paid      [Not Applicable/give details. NB: a new form of Temporary
      Notes: amount of each payment        Global Note and/or Permanent Global Note may be required
      comprising the Issue Price and       for Partly Paid issues]
      date on which each payment is to
      be made and consequences of
      failure to pay, including any rights
      of the Issuer to forfeit the Notes
      and interest due on late payment:

29.   Details relating to Instalment      [Not Applicable/give details]
      Notes: amount of each instalment,
      date on which each payment is to
      be made:

30.   Redenomination:                     Redenomination [not] applicable
                                          (If Redenomination is applicable, specify the applicable Day
                                          Count Fraction and any provisions necessary to deal with
                                          floating rate interest calculation (including alternative
                                          reference rates))

31.   Governing Law:                      [English law [except that Conditions 2(ii) and 2(iii) of the
                                          “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
                                          Subordinated Notes)” in relation to the Bank only (whether in its
                                          capacity as issuer or guarantor) shall be governed by Portuguese
                                          law], [except that Conditions 4(ii) and 4(iii) of the “Terms and
                                          Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
                                          Subordinated Notes)” shall be governed by Portuguese law]
                                          [except that Conditions 2, 4 and 6 of the “Terms and Conditions
                                          of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes” shall be governed
                                          by Portuguese law].]

32.   Other final terms:                  [Not Applicable/give details]
                                          (When adding any other final terms consideration should be
                                          given as to whether such terms constitute “significant new
                                          factors” and consequently trigger the need for a supplement to
                                          the Prospectus under Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.)

DISTRIBUTION
33.   (i)   If syndicated, names and      [Not Applicable/give names and addresses and underwriting           A5.5.4.1
                                                                                                              A5.5.4.3
            addresses of Managers         commitments]
                                                                                                              A12.5.4.1
            and underwriting
            commitments:                  (Include names and addresses of entities agreeing to underwrite
                                          the issue on a firm commitment basis and names and addresses
                                          of the entities agreeing to place the issue without a firm
                                          commitment or on a “best efforts” basis if such entities are not    A12.5.4.3
                                          the same as the Managers)                                           A12.5.4.4


      (ii) Date of Subscription           [•]                                                                 A5.5.4.4

           Agreement:

      (iii) Stabilising Manager(s)        [Not Applicable/give name(s)]
            (if any):


                                                   54
34.       If non-syndicated, name and                              [Name and address]                                                                                  A5.5.4.3

          address of relevant Dealer:

35.       Total commission and concession:                         [•] per cent. of the Aggregate Nominal Amount

36.       U.S. Selling Restrictions:                               [Reg. S Compliance Category 2; TEFRA C/TEFRA D/TEFRA
                                                                   not applicable]
                                                                   (N.B. Interbolsa Notes must be TEFRA C)

37.       Non exempt Offer:                                        [Not Applicable] [An offer of the Notes may be made by the
                                                                   Managers [and [specify names of other financial
                                                                   intermediaries/placers making non-exempt offers, to the extent
                                                                   known OR consider a generic description of other parties
                                                                   involved in non-exempt offers (e.g. “other parties authorised by
                                                                   the Managers”) or (if relevant) note that other parties may make
                                                                   non-exempt offers in the Public Offer Jurisdictions during the
                                                                   Offer Period, if not known]] (together with the Managers, the
                                                                   “Financial Intermediaries”) other than pursuant to Article 3(2)
                                                                   of the Prospectus Directive in [specify relevant Member State(s)
                                                                   – which must be jurisdictions where the Prospectus and any                                          A12.5.1.3
                                                                   supplements have been passported (in addition to the
                                                                   jurisdiction where approved and published)] (“Public Offer
                                                                   Jurisdictions”) during the period from [specify date] until
                                                                   [specify date or a formula such as “the Issue Date” or “the date
                                                                   which falls [•] Business Days thereafter”] (the “Offer Period”).
                                                                   See further Paragraph [11] of Part B below.

                                                                   (N.B. Consider any local regulatory requirements necessary to
                                                                   be fulfilled so as to be able to make a non-exempt offer in
                                                                   relevant jurisdictions. No such offer should be made in any
                                                                   relevant jurisdiction until those requirements have been met.
                                                                   Non-exempt offers may only be made into jurisdictions in which
                                                                   the base prospectus (and any supplement) has been
                                                                   notified/passported.)

38.       Additional Selling Restrictions:                        [Not Applicable/give details]

PURPOSE OF FINAL TERMS
These Final Terms comprise the final terms required for issue [and] [public offer in the Public Offer
Jurisdictions] [and admission to listing on the [Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange/specify other]]
and admission to trading on [the regulated market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange/specify other] of the
Notes described herein pursuant to the €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme of [ISSUER]].

RESPONSIBILITY                                                                                                                                                         A5.7.4
                                                                                                                                                                       A11.13.2
The Issuer [and the Guarantor] accept[s] responsibility for the information contained in these Final Terms.
                                                                                                                                                                       A12.7.4
[[Relevant third party information, for example in compliance with Annex XII to the Prospectus Directive
Regulation in relation to an index or its components] has been extracted from [specify source]. [Each of
the/The] Issuer [and the Guarantor] confirm[s] that such information has been accurately reproduced and
that, so far as it is aware and is able to ascertain from information published by [specify source], no facts
have been omitted which would render the reproduced information inaccurate or misleading].

Signed on behalf of [ISSUER]:                                                         [Signed on behalf of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                                                                      (acting through its London branch)

By: ..........................................................................        By: ..........................................................................
Duly authorised                                                                       Duly authorised



                                                                                 55
                                         PART B – OTHER INFORMATION

1.       LISTING AND ADMISSION TO TRADING
Listing and admission to trading:                    [Not Applicable]/[Application [has been/is expected to be] made                   A5.6.1

                                                     by the Issuer (or on its behalf) for the Notes to be admitted to                  A12.6.1

                                                     listing on [the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock
                                                     Exchange/specify other] and to trading on [the regulated market
                                                     of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange/specify other] with effect
                                                     from [•].]

                                                     (Where documenting a fungible issue need to indicate that
                                                     original Notes are already admitted to trading.)

2.       RATINGS
Ratings:                                             The Notes to be issued have been rated:

                                                     [S & P:          [•]]                                                             A5.7.5

                                                     [Moody’s         [•]]
                                                     [[Other]:        [•]]

                                                     [Need to include a brief explanation of the meaning of the
                                                     ratings if this has previously been published by the rating
                                                     provider.]

                                                     (The above disclosure should reflect the rating allocated to
                                                     Notes of the type being issued under the Programme generally
                                                     or, where the issue has been specifically rated, that rating.)

3.       INTERESTS OF NATURAL AND LEGAL PERSONS INVOLVED IN THE ISSUE                                                                  A12.3.1
                                                                                                                                       A5.3.1
[Save for any fees payable to the [Managers/Dealers], so far as the Issuer is aware, no person involved in the
issue of the Notes has an interest material to the offer. – Amend as appropriate if there are other interests]

4.       REASONS FOR THE OFFER, ESTIMATED NET PROCEEDS AND TOTAL EXPENSES                                                              A5.3.2
                                                                                                                                       A12.3.2
[(i)     Reasons for the offer                       [•]
                                                     (See “Use of Proceeds” wording in Prospectus – if reasons for
                                                     offer different from making profit and/or hedging certain risks
                                                     will need to include those reasons here.)]

[(ii)] Estimated net proceeds:                       [•]
                                                     (If proceeds are intended for more than one use will need to split
                                                     out and present in order of priority. If proceeds insufficient to
                                                     fund all proposed uses state amount and sources of other
                                                     funding.)

[(iii)] Estimated total expenses:                    [•] [Expenses are required to be broken down into each
                                                     principal intended “use” and presented in order of priority of
                                                     such “uses”.]



Notes:
If an issue of Notes is (i) NOT admitted to trading on a regulated market within the European Economic Area and (ii) only offered in
the European Economic Area in circumstances in which a prospectus is not required to be published under the Prospectus Directive,
the Issuer may elect to amend and/or delete certain of the above paragraphs of Part B.
* For Interbolsa Notes only.


                                                                56
                                            (N.B.: If the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII
                                            of the Prospectus Directive Regulation applies (i) above is
                                            required where the reasons for the offer are different from
                                            making profit and/or hedging certain risks regardless of the
                                            minimum denomination of the securities and where this is the
                                            case disclosure of net proceeds and total expenses at (ii) and
                                            (iii) above are also required.)

5.    YIELD (Fixed Rate Notes only)                                                                               A5.4.9

Indication of yield:                        [•]

                                            [Calculated as [include details of method of calculation in
                                            summary form] on the Issue Date.]

                                            The yield is calculated at the Issue Date on the basis of the Issue
                                            Price. It is not an indication of future yield.

6.    HISTORIC INTEREST RATES (Floating Rate Notes only)
Details of historic [LIBOR/EURIBOR/other] rates can be obtained from [Reuters].]

7.    PERFORMANCE OF INDEX/FORMULA, EXPLANATION OF EFFECT ON VALUE OF                                             A12.4.1.2
                                                                                                                  A12.4.1.13
      INVESTMENT AND ASSOCIATED RISKS AND OTHER INFORMATION CONCERNING                                            A12.4.2.1
      THE UNDERLYING (Index-Linked Notes only)                                                                    A12.4.2.2

[If there is a derivative component in the interest or the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII     A5.4.7
of the Prospectus Directive Regulation applies, need to include a clear and comprehensive explanation of
how the value of the investment is affected by the underlying and the circumstances when the risks are most
evident.]

(N.B. The requirements below only apply if the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII of the
Prospectus Directive Regulation applies.)

[Need to include details of where past and future performance and volatility of the index/formula can be
obtained.]

[Where the underlying is an index need to include the name of the index and a description if composed by
the Issuer and if the index is not composed by the Issuer need to include details of where the information
about the index can be obtained.]

[Include other information concerning the underlying required by paragraph 4.2 of Annex XII of the
Prospectus Directive Regulation.]

The Issuer [intends to provide post-issuance information in relation to the underlying [specify what              A12.7.5

information will be reported and where it can be obtained]] [does not intend to provide post-issuance
information in relation to the underlying].

8.    PERFORMANCE OF RATE[S] OF EXCHANGE AND EXPLANATION OF EFFECT ON
      VALUE OF INVESTMENT (Dual Currency Notes only)
[If there is a derivative component in the interest or the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII
of the Prospectus Directive Regulation applies, need to include a clear and comprehensive explanation of
how the value of the investment is affected by the underlying and the circumstances when the risks are most
evident.]

(N.B. The requirement below only applies if the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII of the
Prospectus Directive Regulation applies.)




                                                     57
[Need to include details of where past and future performance and volatility of the relevant rates can be
obtained.]

9.      INFORMATION IN RELATION TO THE REFERENCE ENTITY(IES), EXPLANATION
        OF EFFECT ON VALUE OF INVESTMENT AND ASSOCIATED RISKS AND OTHER
        INFORMATION CONCERNING THE REFERENCE ENTITY(IES) (Credit Linked Notes
        only)
[Include a clear and comprehensive explanation of how the value of the investment is affected by the
underlying and the circumstances when the risks are most evident.]

The details of past and future performance and volatility of the Reference Entity can be obtained on [insert
relevant Bloomberg page].

10.     OPERATIONAL INFORMATION                                                                                   A5.4.1.

(i)     ISIN Code:                          [•]                                                                   A12.4.1.1


(ii)    Common Code:                        [•]

(iii)   Any clearing system(s) other than   [Not Applicable/give name(s) and number(s)/LCH Clearnet,
        Euroclear Bank S.A./ N.V. and       S.A., identification number [ ]*]
        Clearstream Banking, société
        anonyme and the relevant
        identification number(s):

(iv)    Delivery:                           Delivery [against/free of] payment                                    A12.4.1.12


(v)     Names and addresses of additional [•]                                                                     A5.5.4.2

        Paying Agent(s) (if any):

(vi)    Intended to be held in a manner     [Yes/No]
        which would allow Eurosystem
        eligibility:                        [Note that the designation “yes” simply means that the Notes are
                                            intended upon issue to be deposited with one of the international
                                            central securities depositaries (“ICSD”) as common safekeeper
                                            and does not necessarily mean that the Notes will be recognised
                                            as eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy and intra-
                                            day credit operations by the Eurosystem either upon issue or at
                                            any or all times during their life. Such recognition will depend
                                            upon satisfaction of the Eurosystem eligibility criteria.] [include
                                            this text if “yes” selected, in which case Notes other than
                                            Interbolsa Notes must be issued in NGN form.]

11.     TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE OFFER
(i)     Offer Price:                        [Issue Price/Not applicable/specify]                                  A5.5.1
                                                                                                                  A5.5.3.1
                                                                                                                  A12.5.1.1
(ii)    [Conditions to which the offer is   [Not applicable/give details]                                         A5.5.1.1

        subject:]

(iii)   [Description of the application     [Not applicable/give details]                                         A5.5.1.3

        process]:

(iv)    [Details of the minimum and/or      [Not applicable/give details]                                         A5.5.1.5

        maximum amount of application]:                                                                           A12.5.1.4




                                                     58
(v)    [Description of possibility to        [Not applicable/give details]                                       A5.5.1.4

       reduce subscriptions and manner
       for refunding excess amount paid
       by applicants]:

(vi)   [Details of the method and time     [Not applicable/give details]                                         A5.5.1.6

       limits for paying up and delivering                                                                       A12.5.1.5

       the Notes:]

(vii) [Manner in and date on which           [Not applicable/give details]                                       A5.5.1.7

      results of the offer are to be made                                                                        A12.5.1.6

      public:]

(viii) [Procedure for exercise of any        [Not applicable/give details]                                       A5.5.1.8

       right of pre-emption, negotiability
       of subscription rights and
       treatment of subscription rights
       not exercised:]

(ix)   [Categories of potential investors [Not applicable/give details]                                          A5.5.2.1

       to which the Notes are offered and                                                                        A12.5.2.1

       whether tranche(s) have been
       reserved for certain countries:]

(x)    [Process for notification to       [Not applicable/give details]                                          A5.5.2.2

       applicants of the amount allotted                                                                         A12.5.2.2

       and the indication whether dealing
       may begin before notification is
       made:]

(xi)   [Amount of any expenses and           [Not applicable/give details]                                       A5.5.3.1

       taxes specifically charged to the
       subscriber or purchaser:]

(xii) [Name(s) and address(es), to the       [Not applicable/give details]
      extent known to the Issuer, of the
      placers in the various countries
      where the offer takes place.]

                                             [Consider also whether language to the following effect would
                                             be appropriate:

                                             Any person (an “Investor”) intending to acquire or acquiring any
                                             securities from any person (an “Offeror”) should be aware that,
                                             in the context of an offer to the public, the Issuer may be
                                             responsible to the Investor for the Prospectus only if (i) the
                                             Issuer has authorised that Offeror to make the offer to the
                                             Investor and (ii) such Offeror has confirmed to the Manager(s)
                                             that it will comply with all applicable selling restrictions (any
                                             such Offeror complying with (i) and (ii) being an “Authorised
                                             Offeror”). Each Investor should therefore enquire whether the
                                             Offeror is an Authorised Offeror. If the Offeror is not an
                                             Authorised Offeror, the Investor should check with the Offeror
                                             whether anyone is responsible for the Prospectus for the
                                             purposes of the offer to the public by such Offeror and, if so,
                                             who that person is. If the Investor is in any doubt about whether
                                             it can rely on the Prospectus and/or who is responsible for its
                                             contents it should take legal advice.]


                                                      59
                                APPLICABLE FINAL TERMS
Set out below is the form of Final Terms which will be completed for each Tranche of Notes issued under
the Programme with a denomination of at least €50,000 (or its equivalent in another currency).

[Date]

                        [BES FINANCE LTD./BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                  (acting through its [head office]/[Madeira Free Trade Zone branch]/
                              [Cayman Islands branch]/[London branch])

                   Issue of [Aggregate Nominal Amount of Tranche] [Title of Notes]
                              [Guaranteed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                  [acting through London branch]]1
                                      under the €20,000,000,000
                                Euro Medium Term Note Programme

                                  PART A – CONTRACTUAL TERMS
Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the [“Terms and Conditions of
the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”/“Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply
Subordinated Notes”] (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the Prospectus dated [date] [and the
supplement to the Prospectus dated [date]] which [together] constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes
of the Prospectus Directive (Directive 2003/71/EC) (the “Prospectus Directive”). This document constitutes
the Final Terms of the Notes described herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus Directive and
must be read in conjunction with the Prospectus [as so supplemented]. Full information on the Issuer [, the
Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only available on the basis of the combination of these Final Terms
and the Prospectus [as so supplemented]. The Prospectus [and the supplement to the Prospectus] [is/are]
available for viewing at [address] and [website] and copies may be obtained during normal business hours
from [address].
[The following alternative language applies if the first tranche of an issue which is being increased was
issued under a Prospectus (or equivalent) with an earlier date.
Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the [“Terms and Conditions of
the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”/“Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply
Subordinated Notes”] (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the [Prospectus/Offering Circular] dated
[original date] [and the supplement to the Prospectus/Offering Circular dated [date]]. This document
constitutes the Final Terms of the Notes described herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus
Directive (Directive 2003/71/ EC) (the “Prospectus Directive”) and must be read in conjunction with the
Prospectus dated [current date] [and the supplement to the Prospectus dated [date]] which [together]
constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes of the Prospectus Directive, save in respect of the Conditions
which are extracted from the [Prospectus/ Offering Circular] dated [original date] [and the supplement[s] to
the [Offering Circular and the] [Prospectuses]] and are attached hereto. Full information on the Issuer [, the
Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only available on the basis of the combination of these Final Terms
and the Prospectus dated [current date] [as so supplemented] and the [Prospectus/Offering Circular] dated
[original date] [as so supplemented]. Copies of the [Offering Circular and the] Prospectus[es] [as so
supplemented] are available for viewing at [address] [and] [website] and copies may be obtained during
normal business hours from [address].
[Include whichever of the following apply or specify as “Not Applicable” (N/A). Note that the numbering
should remain as set out below, even if “Not Applicable” is indicated for individual paragraphs or
subparagraphs. Italics denote directions for completing the Final Terms.]
[When adding any other final terms or information consideration should be given as to whether such terms
or information constitute “significant new factors” and consequently trigger the need for a supplement to
the Prospectus under Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.]
[In respect of Notes issued by BES Finance Ltd. which have a maturity of less than one year, the minimum
denomination may need to be £100,000 or its equivalent in any other currency.]


                                                      60
1.      Issuer:                                 [BES Finance Ltd./Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (acting through
                                                its [head office]/[Madeira Free Trade Zone branch]/ [Cayman
                                                Islands branch]/[London branch])]1

        [Guarantor:                             Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (acting through its London branch)]1

2.      Series Number:                          [•]

        [Tranche Number:                        [•]

                                                (If fungible with an existing Series, details of that Series,
                                                including the date on which the Notes become fungible)]

3.      Specified Currency or Currencies:       [•]                                                                    A5.4.4
                                                                                                                       A12.4.1.5
4.      Aggregate Nominal Amount:

        – Series:                               [•]

        – Tranche:                              [•]

5.      Issue Price of Tranche:                 [•] per cent. of the Aggregate Nominal Amount [plus accrued            A5.5.1.2
                                                                                                                       A12.5.1.2
                                                interest from [insert date] (in the case of fungible issues only, if   A5.5.3.1
                                                applicable)]                                                           A12.5.3

6.      (i)     Specified Denominations:        [•]

                                                (Where multiple denominations above [€50,000] (which
                                                multiples are less than [€50,000]) or equivalent are being used,
                                                the following wording should be followed:

                                                “[€50,000] and integral multiples of [€1,000] in excess thereof
                                                up to and including [€99,000]. No Notes in definitive form will
                                                be issued with a denomination above [€99,000].”)

                                                (N.B. If an issue of Notes is (i) NOT admitted to trading on a
                                                European Economic Area exchange; and (ii) only offered in the
                                                European Economic Area in circumstances where a prospectus
                                                is not required to be published under the Prospectus Directive
                                                the €1,000 minimum denomination is not required.)

        (ii)      Calculation Amount:           [•]

                                                (If only one Specified Denomination, insert the Specified
                                                Denomination. If more than one Specified Denomination, insert
                                                the highest common factor. Note, there must be a common factor
                                                in the case of two or more Specified Denominations.)

7.      [(i)]     Issue Date [and Interest      [•]                                                                    A5.4.7
                                                                                                                       A5.4.12
                  Commencement Date]:                                                                                  A12.4.1.9

        [(ii)     Interest Commencement         [•]
                  Date (if different from the
                  Issue Date):




1    Delete as appropriate.


                                                         61
8.       Maturity Date:                      [Fixed rate – specify date/Floating rate where the Interest
                                             Period and date(s) are adjusted or any other rate where the
                                             Interest Period end date(s) are adjusted – Interest Payment        A5.4.8
                                             Date falling in or nearest to [specify month and year] [(the       A12.4.1.11

                                             “Scheduled Maturity Date”), subject as provided in
                                             Condition 24(e)[, and] [Condition 24(f)] [and] [Condition 24(g)]
                                             [and] [Condition 24(h)] [and] [Condition 24(k)] of the “Terms
                                             and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
                                             Subordinated Notes)” (include for Credit Linked Notes as
                                             applicable: see below)]]

9.       Interest Basis:                     [[•] per cent. Fixed Rate]
                                             [[LIBOR/EURIBOR]+/- [•] per cent. Floating Rate]
                                             [Zero Coupon]
                                             [Index Linked Interest]
                                             [Dual Currency Interest]
                                             [specify other]
                                             (further particulars specified below)

10.      Redemption/Payment Basis:           [Redemption at par]                                                A5.4.8

                                             [Index Linked Redemption]
                                             [Dual Currency Redemption]
                                             [Partly Paid]
                                             [Instalment]
                                             [Credit Linked Redemption]
                                             [specify other]
                                             (N.B. If the Final Redemption Amount is other than 100 per cent.
                                             of the nominal value the Notes will be derivative securities for
                                             the purposes of the Prospectus Directive and the requirements
                                             of Annex XII to the Prospectus Directive Regulation will apply.)

11.      Change of Interest Basis or         [Specify details of any provision for change of Notes into
         Redemption/Payment Basis:           another Interest Basis or Redemption/Payment Basis]

12.      Put/Call Options:                   [Investor Put]
                                             [Issuer Call]
                                             (further particulars specified below)

13.      [(i)]   Status of the Notes:        [Senior/Dated Subordinated/Undated Subordinated/Undated            A12.4.1.6
                                                                                                                A5.4.5
                                             Deeply Subordinated]

         [(ii)   Status of the Guarantee:    [Senior/Dated Subordinated/Undated Subordinated]]1

         [(iii) [Date [Board] approval for   [•] [and [•], respectively]] (N.B. Only relevant where Board (or   A5.4.11
                                                                                                                A12.4.1.8
                issuance of Notes [and       similar) authorisation is required for the particular tranche of
                Guarantee] obtained:         Notes or related Guarantee)

14.      Method of distribution:             [Syndicated/Non-syndicated]

PROVISIONS RELATING TO INTEREST (IF ANY) PAYABLE
15.      Fixed Rate Note Provisions          [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                             (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                             paragraph)




1     Delete as appropriate.


                                                      62
      (i)     Rate[(s)] of Interest:       [•] per cent. per annum [payable [annually/semi-annually/
                                           quarterly/other (specify)] in arrear]
                                           (If payable other than annually, consider amending [Condition
                                           5(a)) of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than
                                           Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes)”/Condition 4(a) of the
                                           “Terms and Conditions Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes”,
                                           if applicable)]

      (ii)    Interest Payment Date(s):    [[•] in each year up to and including the Maturity Date]/[specify
                                           other]
                                           (NB: This will need to be amended in the case of long or short
                                           coupons)

      (iii)   Fixed Coupon Amount(s):      [•] per Calculation Amount

      (iv)    Broken Amount(s):            [•] per Calculation Amount, payable on the Interest Payment
                                           Date falling [in/on] [•]

      (v)     Day Count Fraction:          [Actual/Actual (ICMA) or 30/360 or specify other] (NB: if
                                           interest is not payable on a regular basis (for example, if there
                                           are Broken Amounts specified) Actual/Actual (ICMA) may not
                                           be a suitable Day Count Fraction)

      (vi)    Determination Date(s):       [•] in each year
                                           [Insert interest payment dates except where there are long or
                                           short periods. In these cases, insert regular interest payment
                                           dates] (NB: Only relevant where Day Count Fraction is Actual/
                                           Actual (ICMA))

      (vii) Other terms relating to the    [None/Give details]
            method of calculating
            interest for Fixed Rate
            Notes:

16.   Floating Rate Note Provisions        [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                           (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                           paragraph)

      (i)     Specified Period(s)/         [•]
              Specified Interest Payment
              Dates:

      (ii)    Business Day Convention:     [Floating Rate Convention/Following Business Day
                                           Convention/Modified Following Business Day Convention/
                                           Preceding Business Day Convention/[specify other]]

      (iii)   Additional Business          [•]
              Centre(s):

      (iv)    Manner in which the Rate     [Screen Rate Determination/ISDA Determination/specify other]
              of Interest and Interest
              Amount is to be
              determined:

      (v)     Party responsible for        [•]
              calculating the Rate of
              Interest and Interest
              Amount (if not the Agent):



                                                   63
      (vi)   Screen Rate
             Determination:

             –   Reference Rate:          [•]
                                          (Either LIBOR, EURIBOR or other, although additional
                                          information is required if other – including fallback provisions
                                          in the Agency Agreement

             –   Interest Determination   [•]
                 Date(s):                 (Second day on which commercial banks are open for general
                                          business (including dealings in foreign exchange and foreign
                                          currency deposits) in London prior to the start of each Interest
                                          Period if LIBOR (other than sterling or euro LIBOR), first day
                                          of each Interest Period if sterling LIBOR and the second day on
                                          which the TARGET2 System is open prior to the start of each
                                          Interest Period if EURIBOR or euro LIBOR)

             –   Relevant Screen Page:    [•]
                                          (In the case of EURIBOR, if not Reuters EURIBOR01 ensure it
                                          is a page which shows a composite rate or amend the fallback
                                          provisions approximately)
      (vii) If ISDA Determination:

             –   Floating Rate Option:    [•]

             –   Designated Maturity:     [•]

             –   Reset Date:              [•]

      (viii) Margin(s):                   [+/7] [•] per cent. per annum

      (ix)   Minimum Rate of Interest:    [•] per cent. per annum

      (x)    Maximum Rate of Interest:    [•] per cent. per annum

      (xi)   Day Count Fraction:          [Actual/Actual (ISDA)
                                          Actual/365 (Fixed)
                                          Actual/365 (Sterling)
                                          Actual/360
                                          30/360
                                          30E/360
                                          30E/360 (ISDA)
                                          Other]
                                          (See 5(b)(iv) for alternatives)

      (xii) Fallback provisions,          [•]
            rounding provisions and
            any other terms relating to
            the method of calculating
            interest on Floating Rate
            Notes, if different from
            those set out in the
            Conditions:

17.   Zero Coupon Note Provisions         [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                          (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                          paragraph)

      (i)    Accrual Yield:               [•] per cent. per annum


                                                   64
      (ii)    Reference Price:             [•]

      (iii)   Any other formula/basis of   [•]
              determining amount           (Consider applicable day count fraction if euro denominated)
              payable:

      (iv)    Day Count Fraction in        [Conditions 7(e)(iii) and 7(j) apply/specify other]
              relation to Early
              Redemption amounts and
              late payment:

18.   Index Linked Interest Note           [Applicable/Not applicable]
      Provisions                           (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                           paragraph)

      (i)     Index/Formula:               [give or annex details]
      (ii)    Calculation Agent:           [give name (and, if the Notes are derivative securities to which    A5.4.7
                                                                                                               A12.5.4.5
                                           Annex XII of the Prospectus Directive Regulation applies,
                                           address)]

      (iii)   Party responsible for        [•]
              calculating the Rate of
              Interest (if not the
              Calculation Agent) and
              Interest Amount (if not
              the Agent):

      (iv)    Provisions for               [need to include a description of market disruption or settlement   A12.4.2.3
                                                                                                               A12.4.2.4
              determining Coupon           disruption events and adjustment provisions]                        A5.4.7
              where calculation by         [•]
              reference to Index and/or
              Formula is impossible or
              impracticable:

      (v)     Specified Period(s)/         [•]
              Specified Interest
              Payment Dates:

      (vi)    Business Day Convention:     [Floating Rate Convention/Following Business Day
                                           Convention/Modified Following Business Day Convention/
                                           Preceding Business Day Convention/specify other]

      (vii) Additional Business            [•]
            Centre(s):

      (viii) Minimum Rate of Interest:     [•] per cent. per annum

      (ix)    Maximum Rate of Interest:    [•] per cent. per annum

      (x)     Day Count Fraction:          [•]

19.   Dual Currency Interest Note          [Applicable/Not Applicable]
      Provisions                           (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                           paragraph)

      (i)     Rate of Exchange/method      [give or annex details]
              of calculating Rate of
              Exchange:




                                                    65
      (ii)    Party, if any, responsible    [•]                                                                 A12.5.4.5
                                                                                                                A5.4.7
              for calculating the
              principal and/or interest
              due (if not the Agent):

      (iii)   Provisions applicable         [need to include a description of market disruption or settlement   A12.4.2.3
                                                                                                                A12.4.2.4
              where calculation by          disruption events and adjustment provisions]
              reference to Rate of          [•]
              Exchange impossible or
              impracticable:

      (iv)    Person at whose option        [•]
              Specified Currency(ies)
              is/ are payable:

PROVISIONS RELATING TO REDEMPTION
20.   Issuer Call:                          [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                            (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                            paragraph)

      (i)     Optional Redemption           [•]
              Date(s):

      (ii)    Optional Redemption           [•] per Calculation Amount
              Amount(s) and method, if
              any, of calculating of such
              amount(s):

      (iii)   If redeemable in part:
              (a) Minimum Redemption [•]
                    Amount:

              (b) Higher Redemption         [•]
                  Amount:

      (iv)    Notice period (if other       [•]
              than as set out in the        (N.B. If setting notice periods which are different to those
              Conditions):                  provided in the Conditions, the Issuer is advised to consider the
                                            practicalities of distribution of information through
                                            intermediaries, for example, clearing systems and custodians, as
                                            well as any other notice requirements which may apply, for
                                            example, as between the Issuer and the Agent or Trustee)

21.   Investor Put:                         [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                            (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                            paragraph)

      (i)     Optional Redemption           [•]
              Date(s):

      (ii)    Optional Redemption           [•] per Calculation Amount
              Amount(s) and method, if
              any, of calculating of such
              amount(s):

      (iii)   Notice period (if other       [•]
              than as set out in the        (N.B. If setting notice periods which are different to those
              Conditions):                  provided in the Conditions, the Issuer is advised to consider the


                                                    66
                                         practicalities of distribution of information through
                                         intermediaries, for example, clearing systems and custodians, as
                                         well as any other notice requirements which may apply, for
                                         example, as between the Issuer and the Agent or Trustee)

22.   Final Redemption Amount :          [[•] per Calculation Amount/specify other/see Appendix/see
                                         item 24(i) below]

                                         (N.B. If the Final Redemption Amount is other than 100 per cent.
                                         of the nominal value the Notes will be derivative securities for
                                         the purposes of the Prospectus Directive and the requirements
                                         of Annex XII to the Prospectus Directive Regulation will apply.)

23.   Early Redemption Amount(s)           [[•] per Calculation Amount/specify other/see Appendix]
      payable on redemption for taxation (N.B. Specify the basis for determing the Early Redemption
      reasons or on event of default [or Amount in the case of Credit Linked Notes)
      under Condition 24(l) or under
      Condition 24(m) if a Substitute
      Reference Obligation has not been
      identified and/or the method of
      calculating the same (if required or
      if different from that set out in
      Condition 7(e))]:

24.   Credit Linked Note Provisions:     [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                         (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                         paragraph)
                                         (Consider whether definitions included in “Terms and
                                         Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
                                         Subordinated Notes)” are up to date)
      General

      (i)     Final Redemption Amount:   [•] per Calculation Amount

      (ii)    Settlement Method:         [Auction Settlement/Cash Settlement/Physical Delivery]
                                         [If Auction Settlement:
                                         The provisions of Condition 24(b) shall apply]
                                         [If Cash Settlement:
                                         The provisions of Condition 24(c) shall apply]
                                         [If Physical Delivery:
                                         The Provisions of Condition 24(d) shall apply]

      (iii)   Trade Date:                [•]

      (iv)    Scheduled Termination      [The day falling [five] Business Days prior to the Scheduled
              Date:                      Maturity Date/specify other]

      (v)     Calculation Agent          [give name and address]
              responsible for making
              calculations and
              determinations pursuant
              to Condition 24:
      (vi)    Calculation Agent City:    [•]

      Credit Provisions

      (vii) Reference Entity(ies):       [•]




                                                 67
(viii) Reference Obligation(s):        [•]
       [The obligation[s] identified
       as follows:
       Primary Obligor:                [•]
       Guarantor:                      [•]
       Maturity:                       [•]
       Coupon:                         [•]
       CUSIP/ISIN:                     [•]]

(ix)   All Guarantees:                 [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                       – Provisions relating to Qualifying Guarantee and Underlying
                                          Obligation: Condition 24(q) [Applicable/Not Applicable]

(x)    Credit Events:                  [Bankruptcy]
                                       [Failure to Pay]
                                       [Grace Period Extension (Condition 24(f)) [Applicable/Not
                                       Applicable]
                                       [If Applicable:
                                       Grace Period: [•]]
                                       [Obligation Acceleration]
                                       [Obligation Default]
                                       [Repudiation/Moratorium]
                                       [Maturity Date Extension: Condition 24(h): [Applicable/Not
                                       Applicable]]
                                       [Restructuring]
                                       – Provisions relating to Restructuring Credit Event:
                                           Condition 24(n) [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                       – Provisions relating to Multiple Holder Obligation:
                                           Condition 24(o) [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                       – [Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable
                                           Obligation [Applicable/Not Applicable]]
                                       – [Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and
                                           Conditionally Transferable Obligation [Applicable/Not
                                           Applicable]]
                                       [other]

       Default Requirement:            [•]

       Payment Requirement:            [•]

(xi)   Conditions to Settlement:       Notice of Publicly Available Information [Applicable/Not
                                       Applicable]
                                       [If Applicable:
                                       Public Source(s): [•]]
                                       (If other than in the definition in Condition 24(j)) Specified
                                       Number: [•]]
                                       (If none specified, then it is deemed to be two.)

(xii) Obligation(s):

       Obligation Category (select     [Payment] [Borrowed Money] [Reference Obligations Only]
       one only):                      [Bond]
                                       [Loan]
                                       [Bond or Loan]

       Obligation Characteristics      [Not Subordinated] [Specified Currency:
       (select all of which apply):    [specify currency] [Standard Specified Currencies]



                                               68
                                    [Not Sovereign Lender]
                                    [Not Domestic Currency:]
                                    [Domestic Currency means: [specify currency]]
                                    [Not Domestic Law]
                                    [Listed]
                                    [Not Domestic Issuance]

       Additional Obligation(s):    [•]

(xiii) Provisions relating to       Condition 24(p) [Applicable/Not Applicable]
       Monoline Insurer to
       Reference Entity:
(xiv) Excluded Obligation(s):       [•]

(xv)   Accrual of Interest upon     [Applicable/Not Applicable]
       Credit Event:
(xvi) Merger Event:                 [Applicable/Not Applicable]
      Condition 24(l):
       If Applicable: Merger        [•]
       Event Redemption Date:
(xvii) [Unwind Costs:               [Standard Unwind Costs/other/Not Applicable]]

Terms relating to Cash Settlement   [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                    paragraph)

(xviii) Credit Event Redemption     [•] per Calculation Amount/As provided in Condition 24(m)]
        Amount:
(xix) Credit Event Redemption       [•] Business Days
      Date:
(xx)   Valuation Date:              [Single Valuation Date:
                                    [•] Business Days]
                                    [Multiple Valuation Dates:
                                    [•] Business Days; and each [•] Business Days thereafter
                                    Number of Valuation Dates: [•]]

(xxi) Valuation Time:               [•]

(xxii) Quotation Method:            [Bid/Offer/Mid-market]

(xxiii) Quotation Amount:           [[•]/Representative Amount]

(xxiv) [Minimum Quotation           [•]]
       Amount:
(xxv) Quotation Dealers:            [•]

(xxvi) Quotations:                  [Include Accrued Interest/Exclude Accrued Interest]

(xxvii) Valuation Method:           [Market/Highest]
                                    [Average Market/Highest/Average Highest]
                                    [Blended Market/Blended Highest]
                                    [Average Blended Market/Average Blended Highest]




                                            69
(xxviii) Other terms or special       [•]
         conditions:
Terms relating to Physical Delivery [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-paragraphs of this
                                    paragraph)

(xxix) Physical Settlement Period: [•] Business Days

(xxx)   Asset Amount:                 [Include Accrued Interest/Exclude Accrued Interest]

(xxxi) Settlement Currency:           [•]

(xxxii) Deliverable Obligations:

        Deliverable Obligation      [Payment] [Borrowed Money]
        Category (select one only): [Reference Obligations Only]
                                    [Bond]
                                    [Loan]
                                    [Bond or Loan]

        Deliverable Obligation        [Not Subordinated] [Specified Currency:
        Characteristics (select all   [specify currency] [Standard Specified Currencies]
        of which apply):              [Not Sovereign Lender]
                                      [Not Domestic Currency]
                                      [Domestic Currency means: [specify currency]]
                                      [Not Domestic Law]
                                      [Listed]
                                      [Not Contingent]
                                      [Not Domestic Issuance]
                                      [Assignable Loan]
                                      [Consent Required Loan]
                                      [Direct Loan Participation]
                                      [Qualifying Participation Seller: – insert details]
                                      [Transferable]
                                      [Maximum Maturity: [•]]
                                      [Accelerated or Matured]
                                      [Not Bearer]

        Additional Deliverable        [•]
        Obligation(s):
(xxxiii) Excluded Deliverable         [•]
         Obligation(s):
(xxxiv) Indicative Quotations:        [Applicable/Not Applicable]

(xxxv) Cut-Off Date:                  [•]

(xxxvi) Delivery provisions for       [•]
        Asset Amount (including
        details of who is to make
        such delivery) if different
        from Terms and
        Conditions:
(xxxvii) Other terms or special       [•]
         conditions:




                                              70
      Additional terms relating to
      Auction Settlement:
      (xxxviii)Fallback Settlement         [Cash Settlement/Physical Delivery] [If Physical Delivery: The
               Method:                     provisions of Condition 24(i) shall apply]

      (xxxix) Additional Business          [•]
              Centre(s):
      (xl)      Business Day               [Following/Modified Following/Preceding]
                Convention for purposes
                of Condition 24:
      (xli)     Succession Event           [Yes/No]
                Backstop Date subject to
                adjustment in accordance
                with Business Day
                Convention:
      (xlii)    Limitation Dates subject [Yes/No]
                to adjustment in
                accordance with Business
                Day Convention:

GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE NOTES
25.   (i) Form of Notes:                   [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for a Permanent Global           A12.4.1.4

                                           Note which is exchangeable for Definitive Notes [on not less         A5.4.3

                                           than 60 days’ notice given at any time]/[only upon an Exchange
                                           Event].]

                                           (The ‘exchange upon 60 days’ notice’ option should not be
                                           expressed to be applicable if the Specified Denomination in
                                           paragraph 6 includes language substantially to the following
                                           effect: “[€50,000] and integral multiples of [€1,000] in excess
                                           thereof up to and including [€99,000].”)

                                           [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for Definitive Notes on
                                           and after the Exchange Date.]

                                           [Book-entry form registered Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]

                                           [Book-entry form bearer Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]

                                           [Notes shall not be physically delivered in Belgium, except to a
                                           clearing system, a depository or other institution for the purpose
                                           of their immobilisation in accordance with article 4 of the
                                           Belgian Law of 14th December, 2005.]

      (ii)     New Global Note:            [Yes/No]

26.   Additional Financial Centre(s) or    [Not Applicable/give details]
      other special provisions relating    (Note that this item relates to the place of payment and not
      to Payment Days:                     Interest Period end dates to which sub-paragraphs 16 (iii) and
                                           18 (vii) relate)

27.   Talons for future Coupons or         [Yes/No. If yes, give details]
      Receipts to be attached to
      Definitive Notes (and dates on
      which such Talons mature):


                                                    71
28.   Details relating to Partly Paid       [Not Applicable/give details. NB: a new form of Temporary
      Notes: amount of each payment         Global Note and/or Permanent Global Note may be required for
      comprising the Issue Price and        Partly Paid issues]
      date on which each payment is to
      be made and consequences of
      failure to pay, including any
      rights of the Issuer to forfeit the
      Notes and interest due on late
      payment:

29.   Details relating to Instalment        [Not Applicable/give details]
      Notes: amount of each
      instalment, date on which each
      payment is to be made:

30.   Redenomination:                       Redenomination [not] applicable
                                            (If Redenomination is applicable, specify the applicable Day
                                            Count Fraction and any provisions necessary to deal with
                                            floating rate interest calculation (including alternative
                                            reference rates))

31.   Governing Law:                        [English law [except that Conditions 2(ii) and 2(iii) of the
                                            “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply
                                            Subordinated Notes)” in relation to the Bank only (whether in its
                                            capacity as issuer or guarantor shall be governed by Portuguese
                                            law] [except that Conditions 4(ii) and 4(iii) of the “Terms and
                                            Conditions Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated
                                            Notes)” shall be governed by Portuguese law] [except that
                                            Conditions 2, 4 and 6 of the “Terms and Conditions of the
                                            Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes” shall be governed by
                                            Portuguese law].]

32.   Other final terms:                    [Not Applicable/give details]
                                            (When adding any other final terms consideration should be
                                            given as to whether such terms constitute “significant new
                                            factors” and consequently trigger the need for a supplement to
                                            the Prospectus under Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.)

DISTRIBUTION
33.   (i)     If syndicated, names of       [Not Applicable/give names]                                          A5.5.4.1
                                                                                                                 A5.5.4.3
              Managers:
                                            (If the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII of the    A12.5.4.1

                                            Prospectus Directive Regulation applies, include names of
                                            entities agreeing to underwrite the issue on a firm commitment
                                            basis and names of the entities agreeing to place the issue          A12.5.4.3
                                            without a firm commitment or on a “best efforts” basis if such       A12.5.4.4
                                            entities are not the same as the Managers)

      (ii)    Date of Subscription          [•]                                                                  A5.5.4.4

              Agreement:                    (The above is only relevant if the Notes are derivative securities
                                            to which Annex XII of the Prospectus Directive Regulation
                                            applies).

      (iii)   Stabilising Manager(s)        [Not Applicable/give name(s)]
              (if any):




                                                     72
34.       If non-syndicated, name of                               [Name]                                                                                              A5.5.4.3

          relevant Dealer:

35.       U.S. Selling Restrictions:                               [Reg.S Compliance Category 2; TEFRA C/TEFRA D/TEFRA
                                                                   not applicable]
                                                                   (N.B. Interbolsa notes must be TEFRA C)

36.       Additional selling restrictions:                         [Not Applicable/give details]

PURPOSE OF FINAL TERMS
These Final Terms comprise the final terms required for issue [and admission to listing on the [Official List
of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange/specify other] and admission to trading on [the regulated market of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange/specify other]] of the Notes described herein pursuant to the €20,000,000,000
Euro Medium Term Note Programme of [ISSUER]].

RESPONSIBILITY
The Issuer [and the Guarantor] accept[s] responsibility for the information contained in these Final Terms.                                                            A12.7.4
[[Relevant third party information, for example in compliance with Annex XII to the Prospectus Directive
Regulation in relation to an index or its components] has been extracted from [specify source]. [Each of
the/The] Issuer [and the Guarantor] confirm[s] that such information has been accurately reproduced and
that, so far as it is aware and is able to ascertain from information published by [specify source], no facts
have been omitted which would render the reproduced information inaccurate or misleading]

By: ..........................................................................        By: ..........................................................................
Duly authorised                                                                       Duly authorised




                                                                                 73
                                    PART B – OTHER INFORMATION

1.     LISTING AND ADMISSION TO TRADING                                                                           A5.6.1

(i)    Listing and admission to trading: [Not Applicable]/[Application [has been/is expected to be] made
                                         by the Issuer (or on its behalf) for the Notes to be admitted to
                                         listing on [the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock
                                         Exchange/specify other] and to trading on [the regulated market
                                         of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange/specify other] with effect
                                         from [•].]
(ii)   Estimate of total expenses related   [•]
       to admission to trading:

2.    RATINGS
Ratings:                                    The Notes to be issued have been rated:
                                            [S & P:          [•]]                                                 A5.7.5

                                            [Moody’s:        [•]]
                                            [[Other]:        [•]]
                                            (The above disclosure should reflect the rating allocated to
                                            Notes of the type being issued under the Programme generally
                                            or, where the issue has been specifically rated, that rating.)

3.     INTERESTS OF NATURAL AND LEGAL PERSONS INVOLVED IN THE ISSUE                                               A12.3.1
                                                                                                                  A5.3.1
[Save for any fees payable to the [Managers/Dealers], so far as the Issuer is aware, no person involved in the
issue of the Notes has an interest material to the offer. – Amend as appropriate if there are other interests]

4.     REASONS FOR THE OFFER, ESTIMATED NET PROCEEDS AND TOTAL EXPENSES                                           A5.3.2
                                                                                                                  A12.3.2
[(i)   Reasons for the offer                [•]
[(ii)] Estimated net proceeds:              [•]
[(iii)] Estimated total expenses:           [•]
                                            (N.B.: Delete unless the Notes are derivative securities to which
                                            Annex XII of the Prospectus Directive Regulation applies, in
                                            which case (i) above is required where the reasons for the offer
                                            are different from making profit and/or hedging certain risks
                                            and, where such reasons are inserted in (i), disclosure of net
                                            proceeds and total expenses at (ii) and (iii) above are also
                                            required.)]

5.     YIELD (Fixed Rate Notes only)
Indication of yield:                        [•]                                                                   A5.4.9


                                            The yield is calculated at the Issue Date on the basis of the Issue
                                            Price. It is not an indication of future yield.

6.     PERFORMANCE OF INDEX/FORMULA, EXPLANATION OF EFFECT ON VALUE OF                                            A12.4.1.2
                                                                                                                  A12.4.1.13
       INVESTMENT AND ASSOCIATED RISKS AND OTHER INFORMATION CONCERNING                                           A12.4.2.1
                                                                                                                  A12.4.2.2
       THE UNDERLYING (Index-Linked Notes only)
[Need to include details of where past and future performance and volatility of the index/formula can be
obtained.]
[Where the underlying is an index need to include the name of the index and a description if composed by
the Issuer and if the index is not composed by the Issuer need to include details of where the information
about the index can be obtained.]



                                                     74
[Include other information concerning the underlying required by paragraph 4.2 of Annex XII of the
Prospectus Directive Regulation.]
The Issuer [intends to provide post-issuance information in relation to the underlying [specify what                                   A12.7.5

information will be reported and where it can be obtained]] [does not intend to provide post-issuance
information in relation to the underlying].
(N.B. This paragraph 6 only applies if the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII of the
Prospectus Directive Regulation applies.)

7.      PERFORMANCE OF RATE[S] OF EXCHANGE AND EXPLANATION OF EFFECT ON
        VALUE OF INVESTMENT (Dual Currency Notes only)
[Need to include details of where past and future performance and volatility of the relevant rates can be
obtained.]
(N.B. This paragraph 7 only applies if the Notes are derivative securities to which Annex XII of the
Prospectus Directive Regulation applies.)

8.      INFORMATION IN RELATION TO THE REFERENCE ENTITY(IES), EXPLANATION
        OF EFFECT ON VALUE OF INVESTMENT AND ASSOCIATED RISKS AND OTHER
        INFORMATION CONCERNING THE REFERENCE ENTITY(IES) (Credit Linked Notes
        only)
The details of past and future performance and volatility of the Reference Entity can be obtained on [insert
relevant Bloomberg page].

9.      OPERATIONAL INFORMATION                                                                                                        A5.4.1

(i)     ISIN Code:                                   [•]                                                                               A12.4.1.


(ii)    Common Code:                                 [•]
(iii)   Any clearing system(s) other than            [Not Applicable/give name(s) and number(s)/LCH Clearnet,
        Euroclear Bank S.A./ N.V. and                S.A., identification number [ ]*]
        Clearstream Banking, société
        anonyme and the relevant
        identification number(s):
(iv)    Delivery:                                    Delivery [against/free of] payment
(v)     Names and addresses of                       [•]
        additional Paying Agent(s) (if
        any):
(vi)    Intended to be held in a manner              [Yes/No]
        which would allow Eurosystem
                                                     [Note that the designation “yes” simply means that the Notes are
        eligibility:
                                                     intended upon issue to be deposited with one of the international
                                                     central securities depositaries (“ICSD”) as common safekeeper
                                                     and does not necessarily mean that the Notes will be recognised
                                                     as eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy and intra-
                                                     day credit operations by the Eurosystem either upon issue or at
                                                     any or all times during their life. Such recognition will depend
                                                     upon satisfaction of the Eurosystem eligibility criteria.] [include
                                                     this text if “yes” selected, in which case Notes other than
                                                     Interbolsa Notes must be issued in NGN form.]
Notes:
If an issue of Notes is (i) NOT admitted to trading on a regulated market within the European Economic Area and (ii) only offered in
the European Economic Area in circumstances in which a prospectus is not required to be published under the Prospectus Directive,
the Issuer may elect to amend and/or delete certain of the above paragraphs of Part B.
* For Interbolsa Notes only.



                                                                75
                     TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES
        (OTHER THAN UNDATED DEEPLY SUBORDINATED NOTES)                                                            A5.4.6
                                                                                                                  A12.4.1.7
The following are the Terms and Conditions of the Notes which will be incorporated by reference into each
Note cleared by LCH Clearnet, S.A. the clearing system operated at Interbolsa – Sociedade Gestora de
Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários S.A., each global Note and each
definitive Note, in the latter case only if permitted by the rules of the relevant stock exchange or other
relevant authority (if any) and agreed by the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer at the time of issue. If
not so permitted and agreed, such definitive Note will have endorsed thereon or attached thereto such Terms
and Conditions. The applicable Final Terms in relation to any Tranche of Notes may specify other terms and
conditions which shall, to the extent so specified or to the extent inconsistent with the following Terms and
Conditions, replace or modify the following Terms and Conditions for the purpose of such Notes. The
applicable Final Terms (or the relevant provisions thereof) will be endorsed upon, or attached to, each
temporary global Note, permanent global Note and definitive Note and will be incorporated into and
applicable to each Interbolsa Note (as defined below). Reference should be made to “Form of the Notes”
above for the form of the Final Terms which will include the definitions of certain terms used in the following
Terms and Conditions or specify which of such terms are to apply in relation to the relevant Notes.

This Note is one of a Series (as defined below) of Notes issued by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the “Bank”),
or BES Finance Ltd. (“BES Finance” and, together with the Bank in its capacity as an issuer of Notes, the
“Issuers” and each an “Issuer”) as specified in the applicable Final Terms constituted, except in the case of
Interbolsa Notes (as defined below), by a Trust Deed dated 3rd February, 1997 (such Trust Deed as modified
and/or supplemented and/or restated from time to time, the “Trust Deed”) made between the Issuers, the
Bank in its capacity as guarantor of Notes issued by BES Finance (in such capacity, the “Guarantor”) and
The Bank of New York Mellon (formerly J.P. Morgan Trustee and Depositary Company Limited and Chase
Manhattan Trustees Limited) (the “Trustee”, which expression shall wherever the context permits include all
other persons or companies for the time being acting as trustee under the Trust Deed). Interbolsa Notes are
constituted by entries in the individual securities accounts opened by Noteholders with the Affiliate Members
of Interbolsa (as defined below).

References herein to the “Notes” shall be references to the Notes of this Series and shall mean:

(i)     in relation to any Notes represented by a global Note, units of each Specified Denomination in the
        Specified Currency;

(ii)    definitive Notes issued in exchange for a global Note;

(iii)   any global Note; and

(iv)    Notes held through Interbolsa – Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas
        Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa”) (each an “Interbolsa Note”). Interbolsa
        Notes will only be issued by the Bank acting through its head office, and will not be issued by BES
        Finance.

References herein to “the Issuer” shall be to whichever of the Bank or BES Finance is specified as the Issuer
in the applicable Final Terms.

The Notes (other than Interbolsa Notes), the Receipts (as defined below) and the Coupons (as defined below)
also have the benefit of an amended and restated Agency Agreement (the “Principal Agency Agreement”)
dated 18th January, 2008 made among the Issuers, the Guarantor, the Trustee, The Bank of New York Mellon
(formerly JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.) as issuing and principal paying agent and agent bank (the “Agent”,
which expression shall include any successor agent specified in the applicable Final Terms) and the other
paying agents named therein. The Interbolsa Notes have the benefit of the Principal Agency Agreement, as
amended by an amendment agreement (the “Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement”) dated 18 February, 2009
made among the Issuers, the Guarantor, the Trustee, the Agent, the Bank acting through its head office acting
as paying agent in Portugal (the “Portuguese Paying Agent” which expression shall include any successor



                                                      76
Portuguese Paying Agent) and the other paying agents named therein (together with the Agent, the
Portuguese Paying Agent and the other paying agents named in the Principal Agency Agreement, the “Paying
Agents”, which expression shall include any additional or successor paying agents) and of the common
representative appointment agreement dated 3rd November, 2010 such agreement as amended and/or
supplemented and/or restated from time to time (the “Common Representative Appointment Agreement”)
made between the Bank, as issuer, and Vieira de Almeida & Associados – Sociedade de Advogados R.L., as
common representative of the holders of Interbolsa Notes (representante comum dos obrigacionistas) (the
“Common Representative”).

Interest bearing definitive Notes (unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Final Terms) have interest        A5.5.4.2

coupons (“Coupons”) and, if indicated in the applicable Final Terms, talons for further Coupons (“Talons”)
attached on issue. Any reference herein to Coupons or coupons shall, unless the context otherwise requires,
be deemed to include a reference to Talons or talons. Definitive Notes repayable in instalments have receipts
(“Receipts”) for the payment of the instalments of principal (other than the final instalment) attached on
issue. Neither Interbolsa Notes nor global Notes have Receipts, Coupons or Talons attached on issue.

The Final Terms for this Note (or the relevant provisions thereof) are set out in Part A of the Final Terms
attached to, endorsed on or incorporated into this Note which supplement these Terms and Conditions and
may specify other terms and conditions which shall, to the extent so specified or to the extent inconsistent
with these Terms and Conditions, replace or modify these Terms and Conditions for the purposes of this
Note. References herein to the “applicable Final Terms” are to Part A of the Final Terms (or the relevant
provisions thereof) attached to, endorsed on or incorporated into this Note.

The applicable Final Terms will state whether this Note is (i) a senior Note issued by BES Finance or the
Bank and, where the Issuer is BES Finance, that such Note is guaranteed on an unsubordinated basis by the
Bank, acting through its London branch, as described in Condition 4(i) (a “Senior Note”), (ii) a dated
subordinated Note issued by BES Finance or the Bank and, where the Issuer is BES Finance, guaranteed on
a subordinated basis by the Bank, acting through its London branch, as described in Condition 4(ii) (a “Dated
Subordinated Note”) or (iii) an undated subordinated Note issued by BES Finance or the Bank and, where
the Issuer is BES Finance, guaranteed on a subordinated basis by the Bank, acting through its London
branch, as described in Condition 4(iii) (an “Undated Subordinated Note”). In each case, where a Note is
issued by the Bank, the applicable Final Terms will state whether such Note is being issued by the Bank
through its head office, its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch, its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch.

Any reference to “Noteholders” or “holders” in relation to any Notes shall mean (i) in the case of bearer
Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the holders of the global Notes and definitive Notes and shall, in relation
to any Notes represented by a global Note, be construed as provided below or (ii) in the case of Interbolsa
Notes, each person shown in the book-entry records of a financial institution, which is licensed to act as a
financial intermediary under the Portuguese Securities Code (“Código dos Valores Mobiliários”) (the
“Portuguese Securities Code”) and which is entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of
their customers (and includes any depositary banks appointed by Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg
for the purpose of holding accounts on behalf of Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg) (each such
institution an “Affiliate Member of Interbolsa”), as having an interest in the principal amount of the
Interbolsa Notes. Any reference herein to “Receiptholders” shall mean the holders of the Receipts and any
reference herein to “Couponholders” shall mean the holders of the Coupons and shall, unless the context
otherwise requires, include the holders of the Talons.

The Trustee acts for the benefit of the holders of the Notes, other than Interbolsa Notes, and for the            A5.4.10

Receiptholders and the Couponholders, all in accordance with the provisions of the Trust Deed. The holders
of Interbolsa Notes shall at all times be entitled, by means of an Extraordinary Resolution, to appoint and
dismiss a Common Representative to act as their common representative, as further described in
Condition 23.

As used herein, “Tranche” means Notes which are identical in all respects (including as to listing and
admission to trading) and “Series” means a Tranche of Notes together with any further Tranche or Tranches
of Notes which are (i) expressed to be consolidated and form a single series and (ii) identical in all respects



                                                      77
(including as to listing and admission to trading) except for their respective Issue Dates, Interest
Commencement Dates and/or Issue Prices.

Copies of the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement, the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and the
Common Representative Appointment Agreement are available for inspection at, and a copy of the
applicable Final Terms may be obtained from, the specified office of each of the Trustee (being as at
3rd November, 2010 at One Canada Square, London E14 5AL, the Agent, the Paying Agent whose specified
office is in Luxembourg (in relation to any Notes listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange) and the other
Paying Agents during normal business hours save that, if this Note is neither admitted to trading on a
regulated market in the European Economic Area nor offered in the European Economic Area in
circumstances where a prospectus is required to be published under the Prospectus Directive, the applicable
Final Terms will only be obtainable by a Noteholder holding one or more Notes and such Noteholder must
produce evidence satisfactory to the Issuer and the Trustee or, as the case may be, and the relevant Paying
Agent as to its holding of such Notes and identity. In the case of bearer Notes other than Interbola Notes, the
Noteholders, the Receiptholders and the Couponholders are deemed to have notice of, and are entitled to the
benefit of, all the provisions of the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement and the applicable Final
Terms which are applicable to them. In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the Noteholders are deemed to have
notice of, and are entitled to the benefit of, all the provisions of the Principal Agency Agreement, to the
extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and the applicable Final Terms which are
applicable to them.

Words and expressions defined in the Trust Deed or the Principal Agency Agreement or used in the                  A5.4.10

applicable Final Terms shall have the same meanings where used in these Terms and Conditions unless the
context otherwise requires or unless otherwise stated and provided that, in the event of inconsistency
between the Trust Deed and the Principal Agency Agreement, the Principal Agency Agreement will prevail
in respect of Interbolsa Notes and the Trust Deed will prevail in all other cases and, in the event of
inconsistency between the Trust Deed or the Principal Agency Agreement and the applicable Final Terms,
the applicable Final Terms will prevail.

Where the Bank is acting as an Issuer through its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch or its
Cayman Islands branch or its London branch in relation to the relevant Notes as specified in the applicable
Final Terms, all references in these Terms and Conditions to the Bank shall be deemed to be references to
the Bank acting through its head office or the branch specified therein. Where the Bank is acting as Guarantor
in relation to Notes issued by BES Finance, as indicated in the applicable Final Terms, all references in these
Terms and Conditions to the Bank shall be deemed to be references to the Bank acting through its London
branch.

1.    Form, Denomination, Title and Transfer
The Notes other than Interbolsa Notes are in bearer form. Interbolsa Notes are in book-entry form (forma          A12.4.1.4

escritural) and can be either registered Notes (nominativas) (in which case Interbolsa, at the Issuer’s request   A5.4.3

can ask the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for information regarding the identity of the Noteholders and
transmit such information to the Issuer) or bearer Notes (ao portador) (in which case Interbolsa cannot
inform the Issuer of the indentity of the Noteholders), as specified in the applicable Final Terms. Definitive
Notes shall be serially numbered, and in the Specified Currency and the Specified Denomination(s). Notes
of one Specified Denomination may not be exchanged for Notes of another Specified Denomination.

This Note is a Senior Note, a Dated Subordinated Note or an Undated Subordinated Note, as indicated in the
applicable Final Terms.

This Note may be a Fixed Rate Note, a Floating Rate Note, a Zero Coupon Note, an Index Linked Interest
Note a Dual Currency Interest Note, a Credit Linked Note or a combination of any of the foregoing,
depending upon the Interest Basis shown in the applicable Final Terms.

This Note may be an Index Linked Redemption Note, an Instalment Note, a Dual Currency Redemption
Note, a Partly Paid Note or a combination of any of the foregoing, depending on the Redemption/Payment
Basis shown in the applicable Final Terms.



                                                      78
Definitive Notes are issued with Coupons attached, and if applicable Talons for further Coupons unless they
are Zero Coupon Notes in which case references to interest (other than in relation to interest due after the
Maturity Date), Coupons and Couponholders in these Terms and Conditions are not applicable.

Subject as set out below, title to the Notes (except Interbolsa Notes), Receipts and Coupons will pass by
delivery. The Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Trustee and any Paying Agent may
deem and treat the bearer of any such Note, Receipt or Coupon as the absolute owner thereof (whether or
not overdue and notwithstanding any notice of ownership or writing thereon or notice of any previous loss
or theft thereof) for all purposes but, in the case of any global Note, without prejudice to the provisions set
out in the next succeeding paragraph.

For so long as any of the Notes is represented by a global Note held on behalf of Euroclear S.A./ N.V.             A5.4.13

(“Euroclear”) and/or Clearstream Banking, société anonyme (“Clearstream, Luxembourg”) each person                  A12.4.1.10

(other than Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg) who is for the time being shown in the records of
Euroclear or of Clearstream, Luxembourg as the holder of a particular nominal amount of such Notes (in
which regard any certificate or other document issued by Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg as to the
nominal amount of such Notes standing to the account of any person shall be conclusive and binding for all
purposes save in the case of manifest error) shall be treated by the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
Finance), the Trustee and any Paying Agent as the holder of such nominal amount of such Notes for all
purposes other than with respect to the payment of principal or interest on the Notes, for which purpose the
bearer of the relevant global Note shall be treated by the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance),
the Trustee and any Paying Agent as the holder of such nominal amount of such Notes in accordance with
and subject to the terms of the relevant global Note and the Trust Deed and the expressions “Noteholder” and
“holder of Notes” and related expressions shall be construed accordingly. Notes which are represented by a
global Note will be transferable only in accordance with the rules and procedures for the time being of
Euroclear or of Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.

References to Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Interbolsa shall, whenever the context so
permits, be deemed to include a reference to any additional or alternative clearing system approved by the
Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Trustee (except in respect of references to Interbolsa),
the Common Representative (in respect of references to Interbolsa only) and the Agent or specified in the
applicable Final Terms.

Title to the Interbolsa Notes will be evidenced by book-entries in accordance with the Portuguese Securities       A5.4.13

Code and the regulations issued by Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários (Portuguese Securities               A12.4.1.10

Market Commission, the “CMVM”), by Interbolsa or otherwise applicable thereto. Each person shown in the
book-entry records of financial institutions, which are licensed to act as financial intermediaries and which
are entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of their customers and which include any
depository banks appointed by Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg for the purpose of holding accounts
on behalf of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg (each such institution an “Affiliate Member of
Interbolsa’’), as having an interest in the Interbolsa Notes shall be the holder of the principal amount of the
Interbolsa Notes recorded.

Title to the Interbolsa Notes is subject to compliance with all rules, restrictions and requirements applicable
to the activities of Interbolsa.

One or more certificates in relation to the Interbolsa Notes (each, a “Certificate”) will be delivered by the
relevant financial intermediary through which Interbola Notes are held in individual securities accounts in
respect of a registered holding of Interbolsa Notes upon the request by the relevant Noteholder and in
accordance with that financial intermediary’s procedures pursuant to article 78 of the Portuguese Securities
Code.

The Interbolsa Notes will be registered in the relevant control issue account of the Issuer with Interbolsa and
will be held in control accounts by each Affiliate Member of Interbolsa on behalf of the Noteholders. Such
control accounts will reflect at all times the aggregate number of Interbolsa Notes held in individual
securities accounts opened with the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa by Noteholders, which are clients of the
Affiliate Members of Interbolsa and include Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.


                                                      79
The person or entity registered in the relevant individual securities accounts of an Affiliate Member of
Interbolsa book-entry registry of the Central de Valores Mobiliários (the “Book-Entry Registry” and each
such entry therein, a “Book Entry”) as the holder of any Interbolsa Note shall (except as otherwise required
by law) be treated as its absolute owner for all purposes (whether or not it is overdue and regardless of any
notice of ownership, trust or any other interest therein).

The Issuer and the Paying Agents may (to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law) deem and treat the
person or entity registered in the Book-Entry Registry as the holder of any Interbolsa Note and the absolute
owner for all purposes. Proof of such registration is made by means of a Certificate issued by the relevant
financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual securities accounts pursuant to
article 78 of the Portuguese Securities Code.

No Noteholder will be able to transfer Interbolsa Notes, or any interest therein, except in accordance with
Portuguese law and regulations. Interbolsa Notes may only be transferred in accordance with the applicable
procedures established by the Portuguese Securities Code and the regulations issued by the CMVM and
Interbolsa.

2.      Status of the Notes                                                                                          A5.4.5

(i)     The Senior Notes and any relative Receipts and Coupons are direct, unconditional, unsecured (subject         A12.4.1.6

        to the provisions of Condition 3) and unsubordinated obligations of the Issuer and rank and will rank
        pari passu with all present and future unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Issuer, without
        any preference among themselves by reason of priority of date of issue, currency of payment or
        otherwise, except for obligations given priority by law.
(ii)    Dated Subordinated Notes and any relative Receipts and Coupons are direct, unsecured obligations of
        the Issuer and rank and will rank pari passu among themselves and at least par passu with all other
        present and future dated subordinated obligations of the Issuer, save for those that have been accorded
        by law preferential rights.
        In the event of the insolvency or winding up of the Issuer, the claims of the holders of the Dated
        Subordinated Notes and any relative Receipts and Coupons against the Issuer will be subordinated in
        right of payment to the claims of depositors and all other unsecured creditors (other than holders of
        Subordinated Indebtedness, if any) of the Issuer.
        “Subordinated Indebtedness” means all indebtedness of the Issuer under the terms of which the right
        to payment of the person(s) entitled thereto is, or is expressed to be, subordinated, in the event of the
        winding up of the Issuer, to the right to payment of all unsubordinated creditors of the Issuer and so
        that for the purpose of this definition indebtedness shall include all liabilities, whether actual or
        contingent, under guarantees or indemnities.
(iii)   The Undated Subordinated Notes and any relative Receipts and Coupons relating thereto constitute
        direct, unsecured obligations of the Issuer which are subordinated to the claims of Senior Creditors of
        the Issuer in that payments are conditional upon the Issuer and (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the
        Bank being solvent at the time of payment and no such payment shall be made except to the extent
        that such payment could be made and the Issuer and (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the Bank
        would still be solvent immediately thereafter. For this purpose, BES Finance or, as the case may be,
        the Bank shall be considered to be solvent if both (i) it is able to pay its debts to its Senior Creditors
        as they fall due and (ii) its Assets exceed its Liabilities to its Senior Creditors.
        Furthermore, in order to allow each of the Issuer and the Bank to continue its business activities (in
        accordance with the Bank of Portugal Regulation 12/92 as amended), any amounts which, under these
        Terms and Conditions, would be payable as principal or interest under the Undated Subordinated
        Notes, will be available to meet the losses of the Issuer or of the Bank, provided: (a) that there has
        been (i) consumption of the whole of the reserves and retained earnings; (ii) writing down of the
        ordinary share capital of the Issuer and the Bank and (iii) writing down of the Issuer’s and the Bank’s
        preference shares (including any preference share capital guaranteed by the Bank); and (b) that




                                                        80
      therefore the Issuer’s and the Bank’s total shareholders’ equity and the preference shares interests of
      the Issuer and the Bank have been reduced to zero.
      In the above circumstances where unpaid principal and interest may be used to meet the losses of the
      Issuer or of the Bank, the unpaid amounts of interest first and then principal will be cancelled and
      utilised to the extent that may be necessary to meet the losses of the Issuer or of the Bank. The
      cancelled amounts will only be reinstated as subordinated credits of the corresponding holders as if
      such amounts had never been written down or cancelled in the event of (i) the winding-up, liquidation
      or bankruptcy of the Issuer or of the Bank, in which event such reinstatement will be deemed to take
      effect at the moment which immediately precedes the commencement of the winding-up, liquidation
      or bankruptcy proceedings; or of (ii) a decision being taken by the shareholders of the Issuer or of the
      Bank to allow a dividend to be paid or to reinstate the cancelled or written down amounts, in each case
      subject to the approval of the Bank of Portugal. In both the above cases and at all times, cancelled or
      written down amounts will revert to being treated as subordinated credits of the corresponding
      holders, without prejudice to the subordination regime applying thereto.

      During any period of cancellation or writing down such cancelled or written down amounts shall not
      bear interest.

      In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous proceedings of the Issuer, no Noteholder (having
      a debt or a liability towards the Issuer) may exercise any set-off or other similar rights against any
      amounts held by the Issuer.

      Without prejudice to the foregoing, the Undated Subordinated Notes will, in the event of a distribution
      of the assets in the dissolution or liquidation of the Issuer, rank senior to the share capital of the Issuer.

      A report as to the solvency of BES Finance or, as the case may be, the Bank by (a) two directors of
      BES Finance or, as the case may be, the Bank or, if the directors have not reported to BES Finance
      or, as the case may be, the Bank within 14 days before any payment needs to be made pursuant to
      Condition 6, the auditors of BES Finance or, as the case may be, the Bank or (b) if BES Finance or,
      as the case may be, the Bank is being wound up, its liquidator shall, in each case in the absence of
      manifest error, be treated and accepted by the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the
      Trustee and the holders of Undated Subordinated Notes as correct and sufficient evidence thereof.

      For the purposes of this Condition 2(iii):

      (A)    “Assets” means, in the case of BES Finance, the total gross assets of BES Finance and, in the
             case of the Bank, the total consolidated gross assets of the Bank and “Liabilities” means, in the
             case of BES Finance, the total gross liabilities of BES Finance and, in the case of the Bank, the
             total consolidated gross liabilities of the Bank, all as shown by, in the case of BES Finance, the
             latest published audited balance sheet of BES Finance and, in the case of the Bank, the latest
             published audited consolidated balance sheet of the Bank, but in each case adjusted for
             contingencies and for subsequent events in such manner and to such extent as such directors,
             auditors or liquidator, as the case may be, may determine to be appropriate; and

      (B)    “Senior Creditors” means creditors of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank who (x) are
             depositors or other unsubordinated creditors of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank or
             (y) are subordinated creditors of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank other than those
             whose claims rank pari passu with or junior to the claims of the holders of Undated
             Subordinated Notes or (in respect of the Bank) persons entitled to claim under the Guarantee
             in respect of such Notes.

3.    Negative Pledge
This Condition 3 shall apply only to Senior Notes and references to “Notes” shall be construed accordingly.

So long as any of the Notes remains outstanding (as defined in the Trust Deed or, in respect of Interbolsa
Notes, as defined in the Principal Agency Agreement, as amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency



                                                       81
Agreement), neither the Issuer nor the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall create or permit to be
outstanding any mortgage, charge, lien, pledge or other similar encumbrance or security interest upon the
whole or any part of its undertaking or assets, present or future (including any uncalled capital), to secure
any Indebtedness (as defined below) or any guarantee or indemnity given in respect of any Indebtedness,
without, in the case of the creation of an encumbrance or security interest, at the same time and, in any other
case, promptly granting to the Noteholders either, at the option of the relevant Issuer, an equal and rateable
interest in the same or providing to the Noteholders such other security as either (i) (except in the case of
Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee shall, in its absolute discretion, deem to be not materially less beneficial to the
Noteholders or (ii) (in the case of any Notes, including Interbolsa Notes) as shall be approved by an
Extraordinary Resolution (as described in Condition 15 and in the Trust Deed or, in respect of Interbolsa
Notes, in the Principal Agency Agreement, as amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement) of the
Noteholders.

“Indebtedness” means any borrowings having an original maturity of more than one year in the form of or
represented by bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (not comprising, for the avoidance of doubt
preference shares or other equity securities) but excluding any Covered Bonds (as defined below):

(1)     where more than 50 per cent. in aggregate principal amount of such bonds, notes, debentures or other
        securities are initially offered outside the Portuguese Republic; and

(2)     which with the consent of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), are, or are
        intended to be, listed or traded on any non-Portuguese domestic stock exchange, over-the- counter or
        other organised market for securities (whether or not initially distributed by way of private placing).

“Covered Bonds” means any mortgage-backed bonds and/or covered bonds or notes (Obrigações
Hipotecárias) issued by any of the Issuers, the obligations of which benefit from a special creditor privilege
(“privilégio creditório especial”) as a result of them being collateralised by a defined pool of assets
comprised of mortgage loans or other loans permitted by applicable Portuguese legislation to be included in
the pool of assets and where the requirements for that collateralisation are regulated by applicable
Portuguese legislation.

4.      Status of the Guarantee                                                                                      A6.1

The Bank, acting through its London branch, has in the Trust Deed unconditionally and irrevocably                    A6.2
guaranteed the due and punctual payment by BES Finance of the principal of, and interest on, the Notes               A12.4.1.6
issued by BES Finance and all other amounts payable under or pursuant to the Trust Deed.

The obligations of the Bank, acting through its London branch, under the Guarantee constitute:                       A5.4.5


(i)     in the case of Senior Notes issued by BES Finance, direct, unconditional, unsecured (subject to the
        provisions of Condition 3) and unsubordinated obligations of the Bank and rank and will rank pari
        passu with all present and future unsecured (subject as aforesaid) and unsubordinated obligations
        (including those arising under deposits received in its banking business) of the Bank, except for
        obligations given priority by law;

(ii)    in the case of Dated Subordinated Notes issued by BES Finance, direct, unsecured obligations of the
        Bank but, in the event of the insolvency or liquidation of the Bank, subordinated in right of payment
        to the claims of depositors and all other unsecured creditors of the Bank (other than creditors in
        respect of indebtedness of the Bank which is subordinated to at least the same extent as the obligations
        of the Bank under its guarantee in respect of such Dated Subordinated Notes); and

(iii)   in the case of Undated Subordinated Notes issued by BES Finance, direct, unsecured obligations of
        the Bank which, to the extent permitted by Portuguese law, are subordinated to the claims of Senior
        Creditors of the Bank, in that payment under the Guarantee is conditional upon the Bank being solvent
        at the time of payment and that no such payment shall be made except to the extent that the Bank
        could make such payment and still be solvent immediately thereafter. For this purpose, the Bank shall
        be considered to be solvent if both (i) it is able to pay its debts to the Senior Creditors of the Bank as
        they fall due and (ii) its Assets exceed its Liabilities to Senior Creditors of the Bank.


                                                        82
Without prejudice to the foregoing, the obligations of the Bank, acting through its London branch,
under the Guarantee in respect of Undated Subordinated Notes issued by BES Finance will, in the
event of a distribution of the assets in the dissolution or liquidation of the Bank, rank senior to the
share capital of the Bank.

A report as to the solvency of the Bank by (a) two directors of the Bank or, if the directors have not
reported to BES Finance within 14 days before any payment needs to be made pursuant to this
Condition 4(iii), the auditors of the Bank or (b) if the Bank is being wound up, its liquidator shall, in
each case in the absence of manifest error, be treated and accepted by BES Finance, the Bank, the
Trustee and the holders of Undated Subordinated Notes issued by BES Finance as correct and
sufficient evidence thereof.

For the purposes of this Condition 4(iii):

(A)    “Assets” means the total consolidated gross assets of the Bank and “Liabilities” means the total
       consolidated gross liabilities of the Bank, all as shown by the latest published audited
       consolidated balance sheet of the Bank but adjusted for contingencies and for subsequent
       events in such manner and to such extent as such directors, auditors or liquidator, as the case
       may be, may determine to be appropriate; and

(B)    “Senior Creditors of the Bank” means creditors of the Bank who (x) are depositors or other
       unsubordinated creditors of the Bank or (y) are subordinated creditors of the Bank other than
       those whose claims rank pari passu with or junior to the claims of the holders of Undated
       Subordinated Notes and persons entitled to claim under the Guarantee in respect of such Notes.

The obligations of the Bank under the Guarantee in respect of Undated Subordinated Notes issued by
BES Finance are conditional upon the Bank being solvent immediately before and after payment by
the Bank. Any amount which might otherwise have been allocated in or towards payment by BES
Finance of principal and interest in respect of the Undated Subordinated Notes will be available to
meet the losses of the Bank.

Furthermore, in order to allow the Bank to continue its business activities (in accordance with the
Bank of Portugal Regulation 12/92, as amended), any amounts which, under these Terms and
Conditions, would be payable as principal or interest under the Guarantee in respect of Undated
Subordinated Notes issued by BES Finance, will be available to meet the losses of the Bank, provided:
(a) that there has been (i) consumption of the whole of the reserves and retained earnings; (ii) writing
down of the ordinary share capital of the Bank and (iii) writing down of the Bank’s preference shares
(including any preference share capital guaranteed by the Bank); and (b) that therefore the Bank’s
total shareholders’ equity and the preference shares interests of the Bank have been reduced to zero.

In the above circumstances where unpaid principal and interest may be used to meet the losses of the
Bank, the unpaid amounts of interest first and then principal will be cancelled and utilised to the extent
that may be necessary to meet the losses of the Bank. The cancelled amounts will only be reinstated
as subordinated credits of the corresponding holders as if such amounts had never been written down
or cancelled in the event of (i) the winding-up, liquidation or bankruptcy of the Bank, in which event
such reinstatement will be deemed to take effect at the moment which immediately precedes the
commencement of the winding-up, liquidation or bankruptcy proceedings; or of (ii) a decision being
taken by the shareholders of the Issuer or of the Bank to allow a dividend to be paid or to reinstate the
cancelled or written down amounts, in each case subject to the approval of the Bank of Portugal. In
both the above cases and at all times, cancelled or written down amounts will revert to being treated
as subordinated credits of the corresponding holders, without prejudice to the subordination regime
applying thereto.

During any period of cancellation or writing down such cancelled or written down amounts shall not
bear interest.




                                                83
      In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous proceedings of the Bank, no Noteholder (having
      a debt or a liability towards the Bank) may exercise any set-off or other similar rights against any
      amounts held by the Bank.

5.    Interest
If the Notes are specified in the applicable Final Terms as Credit Linked Notes, then the provisions of this
Condition 5 are subject to Condition 24.

(a)   Interest on Fixed Rate Notes                                                                               A5.4.7

      Each Fixed Rate Note bears interest from (and including) the Interest Commencement Date at the
      rate(s) per annum equal to the Rate(s) of Interest. Interest will be payable in arrear on the Interest
      Payment Date(s) in each year up to (and including) the Maturity Date. For so long as any of the Fixed
      Rate Notes is represented by a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or
      Euroclear, interest will be paid to Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear for distribution by them to
      entitled accountholders in accordance with their usual rules and operating procedures. Interest on
      Fixed Rate Notes which are Interbolsa Notes will be paid to the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for
      distribution by them to the accounts of entitled Noteholders in accordance with Interbolsa’s usual
      rules and operating procedures.
      If the Notes are in definitive form, except as provided in the applicable Final Terms, the amount of
      interest payable on each Interest Payment Date in respect of the Fixed Interest Period ending on (but
      excluding) such date will amount to the Fixed Coupon Amount. Payments of interest on any Interest
      Payment Date will, if so specified in the applicable Final Terms, amount to the Broken Amount so
      specified.
      As used in these Terms and Conditions, “Fixed Interest Period” means the period from (and including)
      an Interest Payment Date (or the Interest Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the next (or first)
      Interest Payment Date.
      Except in the case of Notes in definitive form where an applicable Fixed Coupon Amount or Broken
      Amount is specified in the applicable Final Terms, interest shall be calculated in respect of any period
      by applying the Rate of Interest to:
      (A)    in the case of Fixed Rate Notes which are either Interbolsa Notes or are represented by a global
             Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, the full nominal amount
             outstanding of the Fixed Rate Notes (or, if they are Partly Paid Notes, the full amount paid up);
             or

      (B)    in the case of Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form, the Calculation Amount;

      and, in each case, multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction, and rounding the
      resultant figure to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any such sub-unit
      being rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market convention. Where the
      Specified Denomination of a Fixed Rate Note in definitive form is a multiple of the Calculation
      Amount, the amount of interest payable in respect of such Fixed Rate Note shall be the product of the
      amount (determined in the manner provided above) for the Calculation Amount and the amount by
      which the Calculation Amount is multiplied to reach the Specified Denomination, without any further
      rounding.

      “Day Count Fraction” means, in respect of the calculation of an amount of interest in accordance with
      this Condition 5(a):

      (i)    if “Actual/Actual (ICMA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms:

             (A)    in the case of Notes where the number of days in the relevant period from (and
                    including) the most recent Interest Payment Date (or, if none, the Interest
                    Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the relevant payment date (the “Accrual



                                                     84
                    Period”) is equal to or shorter than the Determination Period during which the Accrual
                    Period ends, the number of days in such Accrual Period divided by the product of (1) the
                    number of days in such Determination Period and (2) the number of Determination
                    Dates (as specified in the applicable Final Terms) that would occur in one calendar year;
                    or

             (B)    in the case of Notes where the Accrual Period is longer than the Determination Period
                    during which the Accrual Period ends, the sum of:

                    (1)    the number of days in such Accrual Period falling in the Determination Period in
                           which the Accrual Period begins divided by the product of (x) the number of days
                           in such Determination Period and (y) the number of Determination Dates (as
                           specified in the applicable Final Terms) that would occur in one calendar year;
                           and

                    (2)    the number of days in such Accrual Period falling in the next Determination
                           Period divided by the product of (x) the number of days in such Determination
                           Period and (y) the number of Determination Dates that would occur in one
                           calendar year; and

      (ii)   if “30/360” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number of days in the period from
             (and including) the most recent Interest Payment Date (or, if none, the Interest Commencement
             Date) to (but excluding) the relevant payment date (such number of days being calculated on
             the basis of a year of 360 days with 12 30-day months) divided by 360.

             In these Terms and Conditions:

             “Determination Period” means the period from (and including) a Determination Date to (but
             excluding) the next Determination Date (including, where either the Interest Commencement
             Date or the final Interest Payment Date is not a Determination Date, the period commencing
             on the first Determination Date prior to, and ending on the first Determination Date falling
             after, such date); and

             “sub-unit” means, with respect to any currency other than euro, the lowest amount of such
             currency that is available as legal tender in the country of such currency and, with respect to
             euro, means one cent.

(b)   Interest on Floating Rate Notes and Index Linked Interest Notes

      (i)    Interest Payment Dates
             Each Floating Rate Note and Index Linked Interest Note bears interest from (and including) the
             Interest Commencement Date and such interest will be payable in arrear on either:

             (A)    the Specified Interest Payment Date(s) in each year specified in the applicable Final
                    Terms; or

             (B)    if no Specified Interest Payment Date(s) is/are specified in the applicable Final Terms,
                    each date (each such date, together with each Specified Interest Payment Date, an
                    “Interest Payment Date”) which falls on the number of months or other period specified
                    as the Specified Period in the applicable Final Terms after the preceding Interest
                    Payment Date or, in the case of the first Interest Payment Date, after the Interest
                    Commencement Date.

             Such interest will be payable in respect of each Interest Period (which expression shall, in these
             Terms and Conditions, mean the period from (and including) an Interest Payment Date (or the
             Interest Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the next (or first) Interest Payment Date). For
             so long as any of the Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes is represented by a
             global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, interest will be paid


                                                     85
       to Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear for distribution by them to entitled accountholders
       in accordance with their usual rules and operating procedures. Interest on Floating Rate Notes
       or Index Linked Interest Notes which are Interbolsa Notes will be paid to the Affiliate Members
       of Interbolsa for distribution by them to the accounts of entitled Noteholders in accordance
       with Interbolsa’s usual rules and operating procedures.

       If a Business Day Convention is specified in the applicable Final Terms and (x) there is no
       numerically corresponding day in the calendar month on which an Interest Payment Date
       should occur or (y) if any Interest Payment Date would otherwise fall on a day which is not a
       Business Day, then, if the Business Day Convention specified is:

       (1)   in any case where Specified Periods are specified in accordance with Condition
             5(b)(i)(B), the Floating Rate Convention, such Interest Payment Date (i) in the case of
             (x) above, shall be the last day that is a Business Day in the relevant month and the
             provisions of (B) below shall apply mutatis mutandis or (ii) in the case of (y) above,
             shall be postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would thereby fall
             into the next calendar month, in which event (A) such Interest Payment Date shall be
             brought forward to the immediately preceding Business Day and (B) each subsequent
             Interest Payment Date shall be the last Business Day in the month which falls the
             Specified Period after the preceding applicable Interest Payment Date occurred; or

       (2)   the Following Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be postponed
             to the next day which is a Business Day; or

       (3)   the Modified Following Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be
             postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would thereby fall into the
             next calendar month, in which event such Interest Payment Date shall be brought
             forward to the immediately preceding Business Day; or

       (4)   the Preceding Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be brought
             forward to the immediately preceding Business Day.

       In these Terms and Conditions, “Business Day” means a day which is both:

       (A)   a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are
             open for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency
             deposits) in Lisbon in the case of Interbolsa Notes and any Additional Business Centre
             specified in the applicable Final Terms; and

       (B)   either (1) in relation to any sum payable in a Specified Currency other than euro, a day
             on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are open
             for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency
             deposits) in the principal financial centre of the country of the relevant Specified
             Currency (which, if the Specified Currency is Australian dollars or New Zealand dollars,
             shall be Sydney and Auckland, respectively) or (2) in relation to any sum payable in
             euro, a day on which the Trans-European Automated Real-Time Gross Settlement
             Express Transfer (TARGET2) System (the “TARGET2 System”) is open.

       Interest will be paid subject to and in accordance with the provisions of Condition 6.

(ii)   Rate of Interest
       The Rate of Interest payable from time to time in respect of Floating Rate Notes and Index
       Linked Interest Notes will be determined in the manner specified in the applicable Final Terms.

       (A)   ISDA Determination for Floating Rate Notes
             Where ISDA Determination is specified in the applicable Final Terms as the manner in
             which the Rate of Interest is to be determined, the Rate of Interest for each Interest


                                              86
      Period will be the relevant ISDA Rate plus or minus (as indicated in the applicable Final
      Terms) the Margin (if any). For the purposes of this sub- paragraph (A), “ISDA Rate”
      for an Interest Period means a rate equal to the Floating Rate that would be determined
      by the Agent or other person specified in the applicable Final Terms under an interest
      rate swap transaction if the Agent or that other person were acting as Calculation Agent
      for that swap transaction under the terms of an agreement incorporating the 2006 ISDA
      Definitions (as published by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc.
      and amended and updated as at the Issue Date of the first Tranche of Notes and as
      published by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. (the “ISDA
      Definitions”)) and under which:
      (1)   the Floating Rate Option is as specified in the applicable Final Terms;
      (2)   the Designated Maturity is a period specified in the applicable Final Terms; and
      (3)   the relevant Reset Date is either (i) if the applicable Floating Rate Option is based
            on the London inter-bank offered rate (“LIBOR”) or on the Euro-zone inter-bank
            offered rate (“EURIBOR”) for a currency, the first day of that Interest Period or
            (ii) in any other case, as specified in the applicable Final Terms.
      For the purposes of this sub-paragraph (A), “Euro-zone”, “Floating Rate”, “Calculation
      Agent”, “Floating Rate Option”, “Designated Maturity” and “Reset Date” have the
      meanings given to those terms in the ISDA Definitions.
      Unless otherwise stated in the applicable Final Terms the Minimum Rate of Interest
      shall be deemed to be zero.
      When this sub-paragraph (A) applies, in respect of each relevant Interest Period the
      Agent will be deemed to have discharged its obligations under Condition 5(b)(ii) in
      respect of the determination of the Interest Rate if it has determined the Rate of Interest
      in respect of such Interest Period in the manner provided in this sub-paragraph (A).

(B)   Screen Rate Determination for Floating Rate Notes
      Where Screen Rate Determination is specified in the applicable Final Terms as the
      manner in which the Rate of Interest is to be determined, the Rate of Interest for each
      Interest Period will, subject as provided below, be either:
      (1)    the offered quotation; or
      (2)    the arithmetic mean (rounded if necessary to the fifth decimal place, with
             0.000005 being rounded upwards) of the offered quotations,
      (expressed as a percentage rate per annum) for the Reference Rate which appears or
      appear, as the case may be, on the Relevant Screen Page as at 11.00 a.m. (London time,
      in the case of LIBOR, or Brussels time, in the case of EURIBOR) on the Interest
      Determination Date in question plus or minus (as indicated in the applicable Final
      Terms) the Margin (if any), all as determined by the Agent. If five or more of such
      offered quotations are available on the Relevant Screen Page, the highest (or, if there is
      more than one such highest quotation, one only of such quotations) and the lowest (or,
      if there is more than one such lowest quotation, one only of such quotations) shall be
      disregarded by the Agent for the purpose of determining the arithmetic mean (rounded
      as provided above) of such offered quotations.
      The Principal Agency Agreement contains provisions for determining the Rate of
      Interest in the event that the Relevant Screen Page is not available or if, in the case of
      (1) above, no such quotation appears or, in the case of (2) above, fewer than three such
      offered quotations appear, in each case as at the time specified in the preceding
      paragraph.




                                         87
               If the Reference Rate from time to time in respect of Floating Rate Notes is specified in
               the applicable Final Terms as being other than LIBOR or EURIBOR, the Rate of Interest
               in respect of such Notes will be determined as provided in the applicable Final Terms.

(iii)   Minimum Rate of Interest and/or Maximum Rate of Interest
        If the applicable Final Terms specifies a Minimum Rate of Interest for any Interest Period, then,
        in the event that the Rate of Interest in respect of such Interest Period determined in accordance
        with the provisions of paragraph (ii) above is less than such Minimum Rate of Interest, the Rate
        of Interest for such Interest Period shall be such Minimum Rate of Interest.

        If the applicable Final Terms specifies a Maximum Rate of Interest for any Interest Period,
        then, in the event that the Rate of Interest in respect of such Interest Period determined in
        accordance with the provisions of paragraph (ii) above is greater than such Maximum Rate of
        Interest, the Rate of Interest for such Interest Period shall be such Maximum Rate of Interest.

(iv)    Determination of Rate of Interest and Calculation of Interest Amounts                                A5.4.7

        The Agent, in the case of Floating Rate Notes, and the Calculation Agent, in the case of Index
        Linked Interest Notes, will at or as soon as practicable after each time at which the Rate of
        Interest is to be determined, determine the Rate of Interest for the relevant Interest Period. In
        the case of Index Linked Interest Notes, the Calculation Agent will notify the Agent of the Rate
        of Interest for the relevant Interest Period as soon as practicable after calculating the same.

        The Agent will calculate the amount of interest (the “Interest Amount”) payable on the Floating
        Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes for the relevant Interest Period by applying the Rate
        of Interest to:

        (A)    in the case of Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes which are either
               Interbolsa Notes or are represented by a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream,
               Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, the full nominal amount outstanding of the relevant
               Notes (or, if they are Partly Paid Notes, the full amount paid up); or

        (B)    in the case of Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes in definitive form, the
               Calculation Amount;

        and, in each case, multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction and rounding
        the resultant figure to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any such
        sub-unit being rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market convention.
        Where the Specified Denomination of a Floating Rate Note or an Index Linked Interest Note
        in definitive form is a multiple of the Calculation Amount, the Interest Amount payable in
        respect of such Note shall be the product of the amount (determined in the manner provided
        above) for the Calculation Amount and the amount by which the Calculation Amount is
        multiplied to reach the Specified Denomination, without any further rounding.

        “Day Count Fraction” means, in respect of the calculation of an amount of interest for any
        Interest Period:

        (i)    if “Actual/Actual” or “Actual/Actual (ISDA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms,
               the actual number of days in the Interest Period divided by 365 (or, if any portion of that
               Interest Period falls in a leap year, the sum of (A) the actual number of days in that
               portion of the Interest Period falling in a leap year divided by 366 and (B) the actual
               number of days in that portion of the Interest Period falling in a non-leap year divided
               by 365);

        (ii)   if “Actual/365 (Fixed)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number of
               days in the Interest Period divided by 365;




                                                88
(iii)   if “Actual/365 (Sterling)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number
        of days in the Interest Period divided by 365 or, in the case of an Interest Payment Date
        falling in a leap year, 366;

(iv)    if “Actual/360” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number of days in
        the Interest Period divided by 360;

(v)     if “30/360”, “360/360” or “Bond Basis” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the
        number of days in the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis as
        follows:

                                [360 ǂ (Y2 – Y1)] + [30 ǂ (M2 – M1)]+ (D2 – D1)
        Day Count Fraction =
                                                         360
        where:

        “Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period falls;

        “Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the last
        day of the Interest Period falls;

        “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest
        Period falls;

        “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately
        following the last day of the Interest Period falls;

        “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless such
        number is 31, in which case D1 will be 30; and

        “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day
        included in the Interest Period, unless such number would be 31 and D1 is greater than
        29, in which case D2 will be 30;

(vi)    if “30E/360” or “Eurobond Basis” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number
        of days in the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis as follows:

                                        [360 ǂ (Y2 – Y1)] + [30 ǂ (M2 – M1)]+ (D2 – D1)
                 Day Count Fraction =
                                                                360
        where:

        “Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period falls;

        “Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the last
        day of the Interest Period falls;

        “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest
        Period falls;

        “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately
        following the last day of the Interest Period falls;

        “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless such
        number would be 31, in which case D1 will be 30; and

        “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day
        included in the Interest Period, unless such number would be 31, in which case D2 will
        be 30;




                                          89
       (vii) if “30E/360 (ISDA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number of days in
             the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis as follows:

                                              [360 ǂ (Y2 – Y1)] + [30 ǂ (M2 – M1)]+ (D2 – D1)
                       Day Count Fraction =
                                                                      360
              where:

              “Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period falls;

              “Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the last
              day of the Interest Period falls;

              “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest
              Period falls;

              “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately
              following the last day of the Interest Period falls;

              “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless (i)
              that day is the last day of February or (ii) such number would be 31, in which case D1
              will be 30; and

              “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day
              included in the Interest Period, unless (i) that day is the last day of February but not the
              Maturity Date or (ii) such number would be 31, in which case D2 will be 30.

(v)    Notification of Rate of Interest and Interest Amounts
       The Agent will cause the Rate of Interest and each Interest Amount for each Interest Period and
       the relevant Interest Payment Date to be notified to the Issuer, the other Paying Agents and any
       stock exchange or other relevant authority on which the relevant Floating Rate Notes or Index
       Linked Interest Notes are for the time being listed (by no later than the first day of each Interest
       Period) or by which they have been admitted to listing and notice thereof to be published in
       accordance with Condition 14 as soon as possible after their determination but in no event later
       than the fourth London Business Day thereafter. Each Interest Amount and Interest Payment
       Date so notified may subsequently be amended (or appropriate alternative arrangements made
       by way of adjustment) without prior notice in the event of an extension or shortening of the
       Interest Period. Any such amendment will be promptly notified to each stock exchange or other
       relevant authority on which the relevant Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes are
       for the time being listed or by which they have been admitted to listing and to the Noteholders
       in accordance with Condition 14. “London Business Day” means a day (other than a Saturday
       or a Sunday) on which banks and foreign exchange markets are open for business in London.

(vi)   Determination or calculation by Trustee or by a designated bank
       If for any reason the Agent at any time after the Issue Date defaults in its obligation to
       determine the Rate of Interest or calculate any Interest Amount in accordance with sub-
       paragraph (ii) above, then (A) (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes), the Trustee or (B) (in
       respect of Interbolsa Notes), any bank designated by the Common Representative for such
       purpose or, if no such bank is designated, a meeting of the Noteholders by Extraordinary
       Resolution, shall determine the Rate of Interest at such rate as, in its absolute discretion (having
       such regard as it shall think fit to the foregoing provisions of this Condition but subject always
       to any Minimum Rate of Interest and/or Maximum Rate of Interest specified in the applicable
       Final Terms) it shall deem fair and reasonable in all the circumstances or, as the case may be,
       the Trustee, designated bank or meeting of holders of Interbolsa Notes, as the case may be,
       shall calculate the Interest Amount(s) in such manner as it shall deem fair and reasonable in all




                                                90
             the circumstances and each such determination or calculation shall be deemed to have been
             made by the Agent.

      (vii) Certificates to be Final
             All certificates, communications, opinions, determinations, calculations, quotations and
             decisions given, expressed, made or obtained for the purposes of the provisions of this
             Condition 5(b), whether by the Agent or (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee, or
             (in the case of Interbolsa Notes), by or on behalf of the Common Representative or, if
             applicable, the Calculation Agent, shall (in the absence of negligence, wilful default, bad faith
             or manifest error) be binding on the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the
             Agent, the Trustee, the Common Representative the Calculation Agent (if applicable), the other
             Paying Agents and all Noteholders, Receiptholders and Couponholders and (in the absence as
             aforesaid) no liability to the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the
             Noteholders, the Receiptholders or the Couponholders shall attach to the Agent or the Trustee
             or the Common Representative or the Calculation Agent (if applicable) in connection with the
             exercise or non-exercise by it of its powers, duties and discretions pursuant to such provisions.

(c)   Interest on Dual Currency Interest Notes
      In the case of Dual Currency Notes, if the rate or amount of interest falls to be determined by reference
      to an exchange rate, the rate or amount of interest payable shall be determined in the manner specified
      in the applicable Final Terms.

(d)   Interest on Partly Paid Notes
      In the case of Partly Paid Notes (other than Partly Paid Notes which are Zero Coupon Notes), interest
      will accrue as aforesaid on the paid-up nominal amount of such Notes and otherwise as specified in
      the applicable Final Terms.

(e)   Undated Subordinated Notes
      Interest on Undated Subordinated Notes shall accrue from day to day and shall be payable on each
      Compulsory Interest Payment Date (as defined below) in respect of the interest accrued in the Interest
      Period ending on (but excluding) such Compulsory Interest Payment Date. On any Optional Interest
      Payment Date (as defined below) there may be paid (if the Issuer so elects and gives not less than 30
      days’ notice of such election to the holders of Undated Subordinated Notes in accordance with
      Condition 14) the interest accrued in the Interest Period ending on (but excluding) such Optional
      Interest Payment Date (an “Accrual Period”) but the Issuer shall not have any obligation to make such
      payment and any failure to pay shall not constitute a default by the Issuer for any purpose; and any
      interest not so paid shall, so long as the same remains unpaid, constitute “Arrears of Interest”. The
      Issuer may at its option, after giving notice to the holders of Undated Subordinated Notes in
      accordance with Condition 14 at any time pay all or part of the Arrears of Interest (being, if part only,
      the whole of the interest accrued on all the Undated Subordinated Notes during any one or more
      accrual Period(s)) but so that, in the case of any such partial payment, the interest accrued during any
      Accrual Period shall not be paid prior to that accrued during any earlier Accrual Period. All Arrears
      of Interest shall become due in full on whichever is the earliest of (i) the date on which any dividend
      or other distribution is next declared, paid or made on any class of stock or share capital of the Issuer
      or (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the Bank, (ii) the date set for any repayment permitted under
      Condition 7(b) or (c) and (iii) the commencement of winding up of the Issuer or (where the Issuer is
      BES Finance) the Bank. If notice is given by the Issuer of its intention to pay all or part of the Arrears
      of Interest, the Issuer shall be obliged to do so upon the expiry of such notice. Neither Arrears of
      Interest nor any Interest due but unpaid shall bear interest. Payment of Arrears of Interest is subject to
      the approval of the Bank of Portugal.

      For the purposes of this paragraph (e):




                                                      91
      “Compulsory Interest Payment Date” means any Interest Payment Date in relation to which any
      dividend or other distribution has been declared, paid or made on any class of the stock or share
      capital of the Issuer or (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the Bank in the immediately preceding
      interest period; and

      “Optional Interest Payment Date” means any Interest Payment Date other than a Compulsory Interest
      Payment Date.

(f)   Accrual of Interest
      Each Note (or in the case of the redemption of part only of a Note, that part only of such Note) will
      cease to bear interest (if any) from the date scheduled for its redemption unless payment of principal
      is improperly withheld or refused. In such event, interest will continue to accrue, in the case of Notes
      other than Interbolsa Notes, as provided in the Trust Deed or, in the case of Interbolsa Notes, until
      whichever is the earlier of:

      (i)    the date on which all amounts due in respect of such Interbolsa Note have been paid; and

      (ii)   five days after the date on which the full amount of the moneys payable in respect of such
             Interbolsa Note has been received by the Agent and notice to that effect has been given to the
             Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14.

      Provided That if the Notes become redeemable pursuant to Condition 24(b), Condition 24(c) or
      Condition 24(d); and

      (i)    “Accrual of Interest upon Credit Event” is specified as Not Applicable in the applicable Final
             Terms, each Note shall cease to bear interest from the Interest Payment Date immediately
             preceding the Credit Event Determination Date (as defined in Condition 24(m)) or, if the Credit
             Event Determination Date is an Interest Payment Date such Interest Payment Date or, if the
             Credit Event Determination Date falls prior to the first Interest Payment Date, no interest shall
             accrue on the Notes; or

      (ii)   “Accrual of Interest upon Credit Event” is specified as being Applicable in the applicable Final
             Terms, each Note shall cease to bear interest from the Credit Event Determination Date; and

      Provided Further That, if:

      (i)    Condition 24(e), Condition 24(f) or Condition 24(g) applies in respect of the Notes and, in the
             case of Condition 24(e), a Repudiation/Moratorium has not occurred on or prior to the
             Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date or, in the case of Condition 24(f), a Failure to Pay
             has not occurred on or prior to the Grace Period Extension Date or, in the case of
             Condition 24(g), a Credit Event has not occurred prior to the DC Cut-off Date, as the case may
             be; and/or

      (ii)   Condition 24(h) applies in respect of the Notes and the Maturity Date, the
             Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date or the Grace Period Extension Date, as the case may
             be, is postponed as provided therein,

      then interest will accrue as provided in Condition 24(e), Condition 24(f), Condition 24(g) or
      Condition 24(h), as the case may be.

6.    Payments                                                                                                   A12.4.1.12

(a)   Method of Payment
      Subject as provided below:

      (i)    payments in a Specified Currency other than euro will be made by transfer to an account in the
             relevant Specified Currency maintained by the payee with a bank in the principal financial




                                                     92
             centre of the country of such Specified Currency (which, if the Specified Currency is Australian
             dollars or New Zealand dollars, shall be Sydney and Auckland, respectively); and

      (ii)   payments in euro will be made by credit or transfer to a euro account (or any other account to
             which euro may be credited or transferred) specified by the payee.

      Payments will be subject in all cases to any fiscal or other laws and regulations applicable thereto in
      the place of payment, but without prejudice to the provisions of Condition 8.

(b)   Presentation of definitive Notes, Receipts and Coupons
      Payments of principal in respect of definitive Notes will (subject as provided below) be made in the
      manner provided in paragraph (a) above only against surrender of definitive Notes, and payments of
      interest in respect of definitive Notes will (subject as provided below) be made as aforesaid only
      against surrender of Coupons, in each case at the specified office of any Paying Agent outside the
      United States (which expression, as used herein, means the United States of America (including the
      States and the District of Columbia, its territories and its possessions and other areas subject to its
      jurisdiction)).

      Payments of instalments of principal (if any) in respect of definitive Notes, other than the final
      instalment, will (subject as provided below) be made in the manner provided in paragraph (a) above
      against surrender of the relevant Receipt. Payment of the final instalment will be made in the manner
      provided in paragraph (a) above only against surrender of the relevant Note. Each Receipt must be
      presented for payment of the relevant instalment together with the definitive Note to which it
      appertains. Receipts presented without the definitive Note to which they appertain do not constitute
      valid obligations of the Issuer. Upon the date on which any definitive Note becomes due and
      repayable, unmatured Receipts (if any) relating thereto (whether or not attached) shall become void
      and no payment shall be made in respect thereof.

      Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form (other than Dual Currency Notes, Index Linked Notes or Credit
      Linked Notes) should be presented for payment together with all unmatured Coupons appertaining
      thereto (which expression shall for this purpose include Coupons falling to be issued on exchange of
      matured Talons), failing which the amount of any missing unmatured Coupon (or, in the case of
      payment not being made in full, the same proportion of the amount of such missing unmatured
      Coupon as the sum so paid bears to the sum due) will be deducted from the sum due for payment.
      Each amount of principal so deducted will be paid in the manner mentioned above against surrender
      of the relative missing Coupon at any time before the expiry of 10 years after the Relevant Date (as
      defined in Condition 8) in respect of such principal (whether or not such Coupon would otherwise
      have become void under Condition 9) or, if later, five years from the date on which such Coupon
      would otherwise have become due, but in no event thereafter.

      Upon any Fixed Rate Note in definitive form becoming due and repayable prior to its Maturity Date,
      all unmatured Talons (if any) appertaining thereto will become void and no further Coupons will be
      issued in respect thereof.

      Upon the date on which any Floating Rate Note, Dual Currency Note, Index Linked Note, Long
      Maturity Note or Credit Linked Note in definitive form becomes due and repayable, unmatured
      Coupons and Talons (if any) relating thereto (whether or not attached) shall become void and no
      payment or, as the case may be, exchange for further Coupons shall be made in respect thereof. A
      “Long Maturity Note” is a Fixed Rate Note (other than a Fixed Rate Note which on issue had a Talon
      attached) whose nominal amount on issue is less than the aggregate interest payable thereon provided
      that such Note shall cease to be a Long Maturity Note on the Interest Payment Date on which the
      aggregate amount of interest remaining to be paid after that date is less than the nominal amount of
      such Note.

      If the due date for redemption of any definitive Note is not an Interest Payment Date, interest (if any)
      accrued in respect of such Note from (and including) the preceding Interest Payment Date or, as the



                                                     93
      case may be, the Interest Commencement Date shall be payable only against surrender of the relevant
      definitive Note.

(c)   Payments in respect of global Notes
      Payments of principal and interest (if any) in respect of Notes represented by any global Note will
      (subject as provided below) be made in the manner specified above in relation to definitive Notes or
      otherwise in the manner specified in the relevant global Note, where applicable against presentation
      or surrender, as the case may be, of such global Note, if the global Note is not issued in new global
      note form, at the specified office of any Paying Agent outside the United States. A record of each
      payment made, distinguishing between any payment of principal and any payment of interest, will be
      made on such global Note either by the Paying Agent to which it was presented or, in the records of
      Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg, as applicable.

      The holder of a global Note (or, as provided in the Trust Deed, the Trustee) shall be the only person
      entitled to receive payments in respect of Notes represented by such global Note and the Issuer or, as
      the case may be, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) will be discharged by payment to, or to
      the order of, the holder of such global Note (or, as provided in the Trust Deed, the Trustee) in respect
      of each amount so paid. Each of the persons shown in the records of Euroclear or Clearstream,
      Luxembourg as the beneficial holder of a particular nominal amount of Notes represented by such
      global Note must look solely to Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, for his
      share of each payment so made by the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank (where the Issuer is
      BES Finance) to, or to the order of, the holder of such global Note (or, as provided in the Trust Deed,
      the Trustee).

(d)   Payments in respect of Interbolsa Notes
      All payments on Interbolsa Notes (including without limitation the payment of accrued interest and
      principal) will be made by the Issuer to the Portuguese Paying Agent and (i) if made in euro will be
      (a) credited, according to the procedures and regulations of Interbolsa, by the Portuguese Paying
      Agent to the payment current-accounts held in the payment system of the Bank of Portugal by the
      Affiliate Members of Interbolsa whose control accounts with Interbolsa are credited with such Notes
      and thereafter (b) credited by such Interbolsa Affiliate Members from the aforementioned payment
      current-accounts to the accounts of the Noteholders or through Euroclear and Clearstream,
      Luxembourg to the accounts with Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners
      of those Notes, in accordance with the rules and procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream,
      Luxembourg, as the case may be; (ii) if made in currencies other than euro will be (a) transferred,
      on the payment date and according to the procedures and regulations applicable by Interbolsa, from
      the account held by the Portuguese Paying Agent in the Foreign Currency Settlement System (Sistema
      de Liquidação em Moeda Estrangeira), managed by Caixa Geral de Depósitos, S.A., to the relevant
      accounts of the relevant Affiliate Members of Interbolsa, and thereafter (b) transferred by such
      Affiliate Members of Interbolsa from such relevant accounts to the accounts of the Noteholders of
      those Notes or through Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to the accounts with Euroclear and
      Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners of those Notes, in accordance with the rules and
      procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.

      The Issuer must provide Interbolsa with a prior notice of all payments in relation to the Interbolsa
      Notes and all necessary information for that purpose. In particular, such notice must contain:

      (a)   the identity of the Portuguese Paying Agent responsible for the relevant payment; and

      (b)   a statement of acceptance of such responsibility by the Portuguese Paying Agent.

      Interbolsa shall notify the Portuguese Paying Agent of the amounts to be settled, which Interbolsa
      calculates on the basis of the balances and on the tax rules governing the accounts of the Affiliate
      Members of Interbolsa.




                                                     94
      In the case of a partial payment, the amount held in the relevant current account of the Portuguese
      Paying Agent must be apportioned pro-rata between the accounts of the Affiliate Members of
      Interbolsa. After a payment has been processed, such process shall be confirmed to Interbolsa.

      The holders of Interbolsa Notes are reliant upon the procedures of Interbolsa to receive payment in
      respect of Interbolsa Notes.

(e)   Amounts payable in U.S. dollars (not applicable to Interbolsa Notes)
      Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Condition, if any amount of principal and/or interest
      in respect of this Note is payable in U.S. dollars, such U.S. dollar payments of principal and/or interest
      in respect of this Note will be made at the specified office of a Paying Agent in the United States if:

      (i)     the Issuer has appointed Paying Agents with specified offices outside the United States with the
              reasonable expectation that such Paying Agents would be able to make payment in U.S. dollars
              at such specified offices outside the United States of the full amount of principal and interest
              on the Notes in the manner provided above when due;

      (ii)    payment of the full amount of such principal and interest at all such specified offices outside
              the United States is illegal or effectively precluded by exchange controls or other similar
              restrictions on the full payment or receipt of principal and interest in U.S. dollars; and

      (iii)   such payment is then permitted under United States law without involving, in the opinion of
              the Issuer, adverse tax consequences to the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
              Finance).

(f)   Payment Day
      If the date for payment of any amount in respect of any Note, Receipt or Coupon is not a Payment
      Day, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to payment until the next following Payment Day in the
      relevant place and shall not be entitled to further interest or other payment in respect of such delay.
      For these purposes, “Payment Day” means any day which (subject to Condition 9) is:
      (i)     a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are open
              for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency deposits) in:
              (A)   the relevant place of presentation (if presentation is required);
              (B)   in respect of Interbolsa Notes only, Lisbon;
              (C)   any Additional Financial Centre specified in the applicable Final Terms; and
      (ii)    either (1) in relation to any sum payable in a Specified Currency other than euro, a day on
              which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are open for
              general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency deposits) in the
              principal financial centre of the country of the relevant Specified Currency (which, if the
              Specified Currency is Australian dollars or New Zealand dollars, shall be Sydney and
              Auckland, respectively) or (2) in relation to any sum payable in euro, a day on which the
              TARGET2 System is open.

(g)   Interpretation of Principal and Interest
      Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to principal in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to
      include, as applicable:

      (i)     any additional amounts which may be payable with respect to principal under Condition 8 or,
              except in the case of Interbolsa Notes, pursuant to any undertakings given in addition thereto
              or in substitution therefore pursuant to the Trust Deed;

      (ii)    the Final Redemption Amount of the Notes;

      (iii)   the Early Redemption Amount of the Notes;


                                                      95
      (iv)    the Optional Redemption Amount(s) (if any) of the Notes;

      (v)     in relation to Notes redeemable in instalments, the Instalment Amounts;

      (vi)    in relation to Credit Linked Notes, the Credit Event Redemption Amount (if any);

      (vii) in relation to Zero Coupon Notes, the Amortised Face Amount; and

      (viii) any premium and any other amounts (other than interest) which may be payable by the Issuer
             under or in respect of the Notes.

      Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to interest in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to
      include, as applicable, any additional amounts which may be payable with respect to interest under
      Condition 8 or, except in the case of Interbolsa Notes, pursuant to any undertakings given in addition
      thereto or in substitution therefor pursuant to the Trust Deed.

7.    Redemption and Purchase                                                                                     A5.4.8
                                                                                                                  A12.4.1.12
(a)   At Maturity
      Except in the case of Credit Linked Notes, in which case the provisions of Condition 24 will apply,
      unless previously redeemed or purchased and cancelled as specified below, each Note (including each
      Index Linked Redemption Note and Dual Currency Redemption Note) will be redeemed by the Issuer
      at its Final Redemption Amount specified in, or determined in the manner specified in, the applicable
      Final Terms in the relevant Specified Currency on the Maturity Date.

(b)   Redemption for Tax Reasons
      The Notes may be redeemed at the option of the Issuer (after obtaining the consent of the Bank of
      Portugal wherever it is required in the case of Dated Subordinated Notes and Undated Subordinated
      Notes) in whole, but not in part, at any time (if this Note is neither a Floating Rate Note nor an Index
      Linked Interest Note) or on any Interest Payment Date (if this Note is either a Floating Rate Note or
      an Index Linked Interest Note), on giving not less than 30 nor more than 60 days’ notice to the Agent,
      the Trustee (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes), the Common Representative (in respect of
      Interbolsa Notes) and, in accordance with Condition 14, the Noteholders (which notice shall be
      irrevocable), if:
      (i)     on the occasion of the next payment due under the Notes, the Issuer has or will become obliged
              to pay additional amounts as provided or referred to in Condition 8 or the Bank (where the
              Issuer is BES Finance) would be unable for reasons outside its control to procure payment by
              BES Finance and in making payment itself would be required to pay such additional amounts,
              in either case as a result of any change in, or amendment to, the laws or regulations of any
              Relevant Tax Jurisdiction or any political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having
              power to tax, or any change in the application or official interpretation of such laws or
              regulations, which change or amendment becomes effective on or after the Issue Date of the
              first Tranche of the Notes;
      (ii)    the Issuer satisfies the Trustee (except in the case of Interbolsa Notes) or the Common
              Representative and the Portuguese Paying Agent (in the case of Interbolsa Notes) immediately
              prior to the giving of such notice as to (i) above; and
      (iii)   such obligation cannot be avoided by the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance)
              taking reasonable measures available to it,
      provided that no such notice of redemption shall be given earlier than 90 days prior to the earliest date
      on which the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) would be obliged to pay such
      additional amounts were a payment in respect of the Notes then due.
      Prior to the publication of any notice of redemption pursuant to this Condition 7(b), the Issuer shall
      deliver to the Agent and the Common Representative (in respect of Interbolsa Notes) or to the Trustee


                                                      96
      (in respect of any Note other than an Interbolsa Note) a certificate signed by two Directors of the
      Issuer or two Directors of the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) stating that the Issuer is entitled
      to effect such redemption and setting forth a statement of facts showing that the conditions precedent
      to the right of the Issuer so to redeem have occurred, and an opinion of independent legal advisers of
      recognised standing to the effect that the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) has or
      will become obliged to pay such additional amounts as a result of such change or amendment. The
      Trustee or, as the case may be, the Agent and the Common Representative, shall be entitled to accept
      any such certificate and opinion delivered to it as sufficient evidence of the satisfaction of such
      conditions precedent in which event they shall be conclusive and binding on the Noteholders, the
      Receiptholders and the Couponholders.
      Notes redeemed pursuant to this Condition 7(b) will be redeemed at their Early Redemption Amount
      referred to in paragraph (e) below together (if appropriate) with interest accrued to (but excluding) the
      date of redemption.
      “Relevant Tax Jurisdiction” means (i), in respect of payments made by BES Finance, the Cayman
      Islands, (ii) in respect of payments where the Bank is specified in the applicable Final Terms as Issuer
      and is acting through its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch, Portugal (including
      Madeira); (iii) in respect of payments where the Bank is specified in the applicable Final Terms as
      Issuer and is acting through its Cayman Islands branch, the Cayman Islands; and (iv) in respect of
      payments made by the Bank, acting through its London branch, either as Issuer or as Guarantor where
      the Issuer is BES Finance, the United Kingdom.

(c)   Redemption at the Option of the Issuer (Issuer Call)
      If Issuer Call is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Issuer shall (after obtaining the consent
      of the Bank of Portugal whenever it is required in the case of Dated Subordinated Notes and Undated
      Subordinated Notes), having given:

      (i)    not less than 30 nor more than 60 days’ notice to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition
             14; and

      (ii)   not less than 15 days before the giving of the notice referred to in (i), notice to the Agent and
             (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes) to the Trustee and (in respect of Interbolsa Notes) to the
             Common Representative,

      (which notices shall be irrevocable), redeem all or some only of the Notes then outstanding on any
      Optional Redemption Date and at the Optional Redemption Amount(s) specified in, or determined in
      the manner specified in, the applicable Final Terms together, if appropriate, with interest accrued to
      (but excluding) the relevant Optional Redemption Date. Any such redemption must be of a nominal
      amount not less than the Minimum Redemption Amount or not more than a Higher Redemption
      Amount, in each case as may be specified in the applicable Final Terms. In the case of a partial
      redemption of Notes, the Notes to be redeemed (“Redeemed Notes”) will, not more than 30 days prior
      to the date fixed for redemption (such date of selection being hereinafter called the “Selection Date”),
      be selected (i) individually by lot, in the case of Redeemed Notes represented by definitive Notes, (ii)
      in accordance with the rules of Euroclear and/ or Clearstream, Luxembourg (to be reflected in the
      records of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg as either a pool factor or a reduction in nominal
      amount, at their discretion), in the case of Redeemed Notes represented by a global Note and (iii) in
      accordance with the rules of Interbolsa, in the case of Redeemed Notes that are Interbolsa Notes. In
      the case of Redeemed Notes represented by definitive Notes, a list of the serial numbers of such
      Redeemed Notes will be published in accordance with Condition 14 not less than 15 days prior to the
      date fixed for redemption. No exchange of the relevant global Note will be permitted during the period
      from and including the Selection Date to and including the date fixed for redemption pursuant to this
      paragraph (c) and notice to that effect shall be given by the Issuer to the Noteholders in accordance
      with Condition 14 at least five days prior to the Selection Date.




                                                     97
(d)   Redemption at the Option of the Noteholders (Investor Put)
      If Investor Put is specified in the applicable Final Terms (provided that Investor Put may not be
      specified if this is a Dated Subordinated Note or an Undated Subordinated Note), upon the holder of
      any Note giving to the Issuer in accordance with Condition 14 not less than 30 nor more than 60 days’
      notice (which notice shall be irrevocable) or such other period of notice as is specified in the
      applicable Final Terms the Issuer will, upon the expiry of such notice, redeem, subject to, and in
      accordance with, the terms specified in the applicable Final Terms, in whole (but not in part), such
      Note on the Optional Redemption Date and at the Optional Redemption Amount specified in, or
      determined in the manner specified in, the applicable Final Terms together, if appropriate, with
      interest accrued to (but excluding) the Optional Redemption Date. It may be that before an Investor
      Put can be exercised, certain conditions and/or circumstances will need to be satisfied. Where
      relevant, the provisions will be set out in the applicable Final Terms.

      If this Note is in definitive form, to exercise the right to require redemption of this Note the holder of
      this Note must deliver such Note at the specified office of any Paying Agent at any time during normal
      business hours of such Paying Agent falling within the notice period, accompanied by a duly
      completed and signed notice of exercise in the form (for the time being current) obtainable from any
      specified office of any Paying Agent (a “Eurobond Put Notice”) and in which the holder must specify
      a bank account (or, if payment is by cheque, an address) to which payment is to be made under this
      Condition accompanied by, if this Note is in definitive form, this Note or evidence satisfactory to the
      Paying Agent concerned that this Note will, following delivery of the Put Notice, be held to its order
      or under its control.

      If this Note is an Interbolsa Note, to exercise the right to require redemption of this Note the holder
      of this Note must, during normal business hours on a day falling within the notice period, deliver to
      the Portuguese Paying Agent a Certificate and a duly completed and signed notice of exercise in the
      form obtainable from the specified office of the Portuguese Paying Agent (an “Interbolsa Notes Put
      Notice”, each Interbolsa Notes Put Notice or Eurobond Put Notice being a “Put Notice”) and in which
      the holder of the Notes must specify a bank account or, if payment is required to be made by cheque,
      an address to which payment is to be made under this Condition.

(e)   Early Redemption Amounts
      For the purpose of paragraph (b) above and Condition 10, the Notes will be redeemed at the Early
      Redemption Amount calculated as follows:
      (i)     in the case of Notes with a Final Redemption Amount equal to the Issue Price, at the Final
              Redemption Amount thereof;
      (ii)    in the case of Notes (other than Zero Coupon Notes but including Instalment Notes and Partly
              Paid Notes) with a Final Redemption Amount which is or may be less or greater than the Issue
              Price or which is payable in a Specified Currency other than that in which the Notes are
              denominated, at the amount specified in, or determined in the manner specified in, the
              applicable Final Terms or, if no such amount or manner is so specified in the Final Terms, at
              their nominal amount; or
      (iii)   in the case of a Zero Coupon Note, at an amount (the “Amortised Face Amount”) calculated in
              accordance with the following formula:

              Early Redemption Amount = RP x (1 + AY)y

              where:

              “RP” means the Reference Price;

              “AY” means the Accrual Yield expressed as a decimal; and

              “y” is a fraction the numerator of which is equal to the number of days (calculated on the basis
              of a 360-day year consisting of 12 months of 30 days each) from (and including) the Issue Date



                                                      98
             of the first Tranche of the Notes to (but excluding) the date fixed for redemption or (as the case
             may be) the date upon which such Note becomes due and repayable and the denominator of
             which is 360,

             or on such other calculation basis as may be specified in the applicable Final Terms.

(f)   Instalments
      If the Notes are repayable in instalments, they will be redeemed in the Instalment Amounts and on the
      Instalment Dates. In the case of early redemption, the Early Redemption Amount will be determined
      pursuant to paragraph (e) above.

(g)   Partly Paid Notes
      If the Notes are Partly Paid Notes, they will be redeemed, whether at maturity, early redemption or
      otherwise, in accordance with the provisions of this Condition and the applicable Final Terms.

(h)   Purchases
      The Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or any of its Subsidiaries (as defined in the
      Principal Agency Agreement) may (after obtaining the consent of the Bank of Portugal whenever it is
      required in the case of Dated Subordinated Guaranteed Notes and Undated Subordinated Guaranteed
      Notes) at any time purchase Notes (provided that, in the case of definitive Notes, all unmatured
      Receipts, Coupons and Talons appertaining thereto are purchased therewith) at any price in the open
      market or otherwise. Such Notes may be held, reissued, resold or, at the option of the Issuer or the
      Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), surrendered to any Paying Agent for cancellation or, in the
      case of Interbolsa Notes, cancelled by Interbolsa following receipt by Interbolsa of notice thereof by
      the Portuguese Paying Agent.

(i)   Cancellation
      All global Notes and definitive Notes which are redeemed will forthwith be cancelled (together with
      all unmatured Receipts and Coupons attached thereto or surrendered therewith at the time of
      redemption). All global Notes and definitive Notes so cancelled and the global Notes and definitive
      Notes purchased and cancelled pursuant to paragraph (h) above (together with all unmatured Receipts
      and Coupons cancelled therewith) shall be forwarded to the Agent and cannot be reissued or resold.

      All Interbolsa Notes which are (a) redeemed or (b) purchased by or on behalf of the Issuer or the Bank
      (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or any of its Subsidiaries will forthwith be cancelled, by Interbolsa
      following receipt by Interbolsa of notice thereof by the Portuguese Paying Agent, and accordingly
      such Interbolsa Notes may not be held, reissued or resold and shall not entitle the holder to vote at
      any meetings of the Noteholders and shall not be deemed to be outstanding for the purposes of
      calculating quorums at meetings of the Noteholders or for the purposes of Condition 15 or the
      Principal Agency Agreement, as amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement.

(j)   Late payment on Zero Coupon Notes
      If the amount payable in respect of any Zero Coupon Note upon redemption of such Zero Coupon Note
      pursuant to paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d) above or upon its becoming due and repayable as provided in
      Condition 10 is improperly withheld or refused, the amount due and repayable in respect of such Zero
      Coupon Note shall be the amount calculated as provided in paragraph (e)(iii) above as though the
      references therein to the date fixed for the redemption or the date upon which such Zero Coupon Note
      becomes due and payable were replaced by references to the date which is the earlier of:

      (i)    the date on which all amounts due in respect of such Zero Coupon Note have been paid; and

      (ii)   the fifth day after the date on which the full amount of the moneys payable has been received
             by the Agent or (except in the case of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee or (in the case of Interbolsa




                                                     99
               Notes) the Portuguese Paying Agent and notice to that effect has been given to the Noteholders
               either in accordance with Condition 14 or individually.

8.      Taxation                                                                                                      A5.4.14

All payments of principal and interest in respect of the Notes, Receipts and Coupons by BES Finance or the            A12.4.1.14
Bank will be made without withholding or deduction for or on account of any present or future taxes or
duties of whatever nature imposed or levied by or on behalf of any Relevant Tax Jurisdiction as defined in
Condition 7(b) or any political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax, unless
such withholding or deduction is required by law. In such event, BES Finance or the Bank will pay such
additional amounts as shall be necessary in order that the net amounts received by the holders of the Notes,
Receipts or Coupons after such withholding or deduction shall equal the respective amounts of principal and
interest which would otherwise have been receivable in respect of the Notes, Receipts or Coupons, as the
case may be, in the absence of such withholding or deduction; except that no such additional amounts shall
be payable with respect to any Note, Receipt or Coupon:

(i)     the Noteholder, Receiptholder or Couponholder of which is liable to such taxes, duties, assessments
        or governmental charges in respect of such Note, Receipt or Coupon by reason of its having some
        connection with the Relevant Jurisdiction by which such taxes, duties, assessments or charges have
        been imposed, levied, collected, withheld or assessed other than the mere holding of the Note, Receipt
        or Coupon; and/or

(ii)    where such withholding or deduction is imposed on a payment to or for an individual and is required
        to be made pursuant to European Council Directive 2003/48/EC or any law implementing or
        complying with, or introduced in order to conform to, such Directive; and/or

(iii)   in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Noteholder, Receiptholder or
        Couponholder of which would be able to avoid such withholding or deduction by presenting the
        relevant Note, Receipt or Coupon to another Paying Agent in a Member State of the European Union;
        and/or

(iv)    to, or to a third party on behalf of, a Noteholder, Receiptholder or Couponholder in respect of whom
        the information and documentation required in order to comply with Madeira Free Trade Zone tax
        regime, and any implementing legislation, is not received before the Income Payment Date (as defined
        below); and/or

(v)     in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, a Noteholder, Receiptholder or
        Couponholder in respect of whom the information and documentation (which may include
        certificates) required in order to comply with Portuguese Decree-Law 193/2005 of 7th November,
        2005, and any implementing legislation, is not received before the Income Payment Date or which
        does not comply with the formalities in order to benefit from tax treaty benefits, where applicable;
        and/or

(vi)    in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, a Noteholder, Receiptholder or
        Couponholder resident for tax purposes in the Republic of Portugal or any political subdivision or any
        authority thereof or therein having power to tax or a resident in a tax haven jurisdiction as defined in
        Order 150/2004, of 13th February, 2004 (Portaria do Ministro das Finanças e da Administração
        Pública no 150/2004) as amended from time to time, issued by the Portuguese Minister of Finance
        and Public Administration, with the exception of central banks and governmental agencies of those
        blacklisted jurisdictions, or a non-resident legal entity held, directly or indirectly, in more than 20 per
        cent. by entities resident in the Republic of Portugal; and/or

(vii) in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, (i) a Portuguese resident legal entity
      subject to Portuguese corporation tax with the exception of entities that benefit from a Portuguese
      withholding tax waiver or from Portuguese income tax exemptions, or (ii) a legal entity not resident
      in Portugal acting with respect to the holding of the Notes through a permanent establishment in
      Portugal; and/or



                                                       100
(viii) in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, where presentation of the Note, Receipt or
       Coupon is required, presented for payment more than 30 days after the Relevant Date except to the
       extent that the holder thereof would have been entitled to an additional amount on presenting the same
       for payment on such thirtieth day, assuming that day to have been a Payment Day (as defined in
       Condition 6).

As used herein, the “Relevant Date” means the date on which such payment first becomes due, except that,
if the full amount of the moneys payable has not been duly received by the Agent or (other than in the case
of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee on or prior to such due date, it means the date on which, the full amount of
such moneys having been so received, notice to that effect is duly given to the Noteholders in accordance
with Condition 14.

9.    Prescription                                                                                                 A5.4.7

The global Notes, definitive Notes, Receipts and Coupons will become void unless claims in respect of
principal and/or interest are made within a period of 10 years (in the case of principal) and five years (in the
case of interest) after the Relevant Date (as defined in Condition 8) therefor.

There shall not be included in any Coupon sheet issued on exchange of a Talon any Coupon the claim for
payment in respect of which would be void pursuant to this Condition 9 or Condition 6(b) or any Talon which
itself would be void pursuant to Condition 6(b).

Claims for principal and interest in respect of the Interbolsa Notes shall become void unless the relevant
Certificates are surrendered within 20 years and five years respectively of the Relevant Date.

10.    Events of Default
(A)    This Condition 10(A) applies only to Senior Notes and in this Condition 10(A) references to “Notes”
       shall be construed accordingly.

       If any one or more of the following events (each an “Event of Default”) shall occur and be continuing:

       (i)    default is made in the payment of any principal or interest due in respect of the Notes or any
              of them and such default continues, in the case of principal, for a period of five Portuguese
              Business Days or, in the case of interest, for a period of 10 Portuguese Business Days; or

       (ii)   the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) fails to perform or observe any of its
              other obligations in respect of the Notes or, in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes,
              under the Trust Deed and (except where, (a) for Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, in the
              opinion of the Trustee, or (b) for Interbolsa Notes, in the opinion of the Common
              Representative, such default is not capable of remedy where no such continuation or notice as
              is hereinafter referred to will be required) such failure continues for the period of 30 days (or
              such longer period as the Trustee (in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes) or the
              Common Representative (in respect of Interbolsa Notes), may permit) after notice has been
              given to the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank requiring the same to be remedied; or

      (iii)   the repayment of any indebtedness owing by the Issuer or by the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
              Finance) is accelerated by reason of default and such acceleration has not been rescinded or
              annulled, or the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) defaults (after whichever
              is the longer of any originally applicable period of grace and 14 days after the due date) in any
              payment of any indebtedness or in the honouring of any guarantee or indemnity in respect of
              any indebtedness provided that no such event shall constitute an Event of Default unless the
              indebtedness whether alone or when aggregated with other indebtedness relating to all (if any)
              other such events which shall have occurred shall exceed U.S.$10,000,000 (or its equivalent in
              any other currency or currencies) or, if greater, an amount equal to 1 per cent. of the Bank’s
              Shareholders’ Funds; or

      (iv)    any order shall be made by any competent court or resolution passed for the winding up or
              dissolution of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) (other than for the


                                                      101
       purpose of an amalgamation, merger or reconstruction approved (i) by the Trustee or by an
       Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa
       Notes or (ii) by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders in the case of Interbolsa
       Notes); or

(v)    the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall cease to carry on the whole or
       substantially the whole of its business (other than for the purpose of an amalgamation, merger
       or reconstruction approved (i) by the Trustee or by an Extraordinary Resolution of the
       Noteholders in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes or (ii) by an Extraordinary
       Resolution (as described in Condition 15(b)) of the Noteholders in the case of Interbolsa
       Notes); or

(vi)   the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall stop payment or shall be unable
       to, or shall admit inability to, pay its debts as they fall due, or shall be adjudicated or found
       bankrupt or insolvent by a court of competent jurisdiction or shall make a conveyance or
       assignment for the benefit of, or shall enter into any composition or other arrangement with, its
       creditors generally; or

(vii) a receiver, trustee or other similar official shall be appointed in relation to the Issuer or the Bank
      (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or in relation to the whole or a substantial part of the assets
      of either of them or a temporary manager of the Bank is appointed by the Bank of Portugal or
      an encumbrancer shall take possession of the whole or a substantial part of the assets of the
      Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), or a distress or execution or other process
      shall be levied or enforced upon or sued out against the whole or a substantial part of the assets
      of either of them and in any of the foregoing cases it or he shall not be discharged within 60
      days; or

(viii) the Bank sells, transfers, lends or otherwise disposes of the whole or a major part of its
       undertaking or assets (including shareholdings in its Subsidiaries or associated companies) and
       such disposal is substantial in relation to the assets of the Bank and its Subsidiaries as a whole,
       other than selling, transferring, lending or otherwise disposing on an arm’s length basis; or

(ix)   except where the Issuer has been substituted as principal debtor pursuant to Condition 18, the
       Issuer (where the Issuer is BES Finance) ceases to be a Subsidiary wholly owned and
       controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Bank; or

(x)    (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the Guarantee is terminated or shall cease to be in full force
       and effect,

       then:

       (a)     in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trustee at its discretion may, and if
               so requested in writing by the holders of not less than 20 per cent. of the nominal amount
               of the Notes then outstanding or if so directed by an Extraordinary Resolution of the
               Noteholders shall (subject in each case to being indemnified to its satisfaction), give
               notice to the Issuer that the Notes are, and they shall accordingly thereby forthwith
               become, immediately due and repayable at their Early Redemption Amount (as
               described in Condition 7(e)) together with accrued interest (as provided in the Trust
               Deed) provided that, in the case of any such Events of Default other than those described
               in sub-paragraphs (i) and (iv) above, the Trustee shall have certified to the Issuer that
               such Event of Default is in its opinion materially prejudicial to the interests of the
               Noteholders; or

       (b)     in respect of any Interbolsa Notes, the Common Representative shall, if so requested in
               writing through a request addressed to it and to the Bank by the holders of not less than
               20 per cent. of the nominal amount of the Notes then outstanding, or if so directed by an
               Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders, give notice to the Issuer (the “Acceleration
               Notice”) and to the Portuguese Paying Agent at the respective specified office, effective


                                                102
                     upon the date of receipt thereof by the Portuguese Paying Agent, that the Interbolsa
                     Notes are, and they shall accordingly thereby forthwith become, immediately due and
                     payable at the Early Redemption Amount (as described in Condition 7(e)) together with
                     accrued interest (if any) to the date of repayment, without demand, protest or other
                     notice of any kind.

      As used above:

      “Bank’s Shareholders’ Funds” means, at any relevant time, a sum equal to the aggregate of the Bank’s
      shareholders’ equity as certified by the Auditors (as defined in the Paying Agency Agreement) of the
      Bank by reference to the latest audited consolidated financial statements of the Bank; and

      “Portuguese Business Day” means a day on which commercial banks are open for business in Lisbon.

(B)   This Condition 10(B) applies only to Dated Subordinated Notes and Undated Subordinated Notes and
      in this Condition 10(B) references to “Notes” shall be construed accordingly.

      If any one or more of the following events (each an “Event of Default”) shall occur:

      (i)    default is made in the payment of any principal or interest due in respect of the Notes or any
             of them and such default continues, in the case of principal, for a period of five Portuguese
             Business Days (as defined in Condition 10(A)) or, in the case of interest, for a period of
             10 Portuguese Business Days; or

      (ii)   any order shall be made by any competent court or resolution passed for the winding up or
             dissolution of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) (other than for the
             purpose of an amalgamation, merger or reconstruction approved by the Trustee (except in the
             case of Interbolsa Notes) or by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders),

             then:

             (a)     in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes the Trustee at its discretion may, and if
                     so requested in writing by the holders of not less than 20 per cent. of the nominal amount
                     of the Notes then outstanding or if so directed by an Extraordinary Resolution of the
                     Noteholders shall (subject in each case to being indemnified to its satisfaction), give
                     notice to the Issuer that the Notes are, and they shall accordingly thereby forthwith
                     become, immediately due and repayable at their Early Redemption Amount (as
                     described in Condition 7(e)) together with accrued interest (as provided in the Trust
                     Deed); or

             (b)     in respect of any Interbolsa Notes, the Common Representative shall, if so requested in
                     writing through a request addressed to it and to the Bank by the holders of not less than
                     20 per cent. of the nominal amount of the Notes then outstanding, or if so directed by an
                     Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders, give notice to the Issuer (the “Acceleration
                     Notice”) and to the Portuguese Paying Agent at the respective specified office, effective
                     upon the date of receipt thereof by the Portuguese Paying Agent, that the Interbolsa
                     Notes are, and they shall accordingly thereby forthwith become, immediately due and
                     payable at the Early Redemption Amount (as described in Condition 7(e)) together with
                     accrued interest (if any) to the date of repayment, without demand, protest or other
                     notice of any kind.

      Notwithstanding the giving of any such notice that the Dated Subordinated Notes or, as the case may
      be, the Undated Subordinated Notes are immediately due and repayable, the Issuer may only redeem
      such Notes with the prior approval of the Bank of Portugal.

      There can be no assurance that the Bank of Portugal will give its approval to any such redemption.
      Noteholders should be aware of the fact that the Bank of Portugal’s approval will depend on the
      capital adequacy of the Bank.



                                                     103
11.     Replacement of global Notes, definitive Notes, Receipts, Coupons and Talons
Should any global Note, definitive Note, Receipt, Coupon or Talon be lost, stolen, mutilated, defaced or
destroyed, it may be replaced at the specified office of the Agent upon payment by the claimant of such costs
and expenses as may be incurred in connection therewith and on such terms as to evidence and indemnity as
the Issuer may reasonably require. Mutilated or defaced global Notes, definitive Notes, Receipts, Coupons
or Talons must be surrendered before replacements will be issued.

12.     Agent and Paying Agents
The names of the initial Agent and the other initial Paying Agents and their initial specified offices are set
out below.

The Issuer and the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) are entitled (with the prior written consent of the
Trustee, save that such consent will not be required in respect of the Portuguese Paying Agent) to vary or
terminate the appointment of any Paying Agent and/or appoint additional or other Paying Agents and/ or
approve any change in the specified office through which any Paying Agent acts, provided that:

(i)     so long as the Notes are listed on any stock exchange or admitted to listing by any relevant authority,
        there will at all times be a Paying Agent with a specified office in such place as may be required by
        the rules and regulations of the relevant stock exchange or such other relevant authority;

(ii)    there will at all times be maintained a Paying Agent in a Member State of the European Union that is
        not obliged to withhold or deduct tax pursuant to European Council Directive 2003/48/ EC or any law
        implementing or complying with, or introduced in order to conform to, such Directive;

(iii)   there will at all times be a Paying Agent outside the United Kingdom and Portugal (including
        Madeira); and

(iv)    there will at all times be a Paying Agent in Portugal capable of making payment in respect of the
        Interbolsa Notes as contemplated by these terms and conditions, the Principal Agency Agreement, as
        amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and applicable Portuguese law and regulation.

In addition, the Issuer and the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall forthwith appoint a Paying Agent
having a specified office in New York City in the circumstances described in the final paragraph of Condition
6(e). Any variation, termination, appointment or change shall only take effect (other than in the case of
insolvency, when it shall be of immediate effect) after not less than 30 nor more than 45 days’ prior notice
thereof shall have been given to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14.

13.     Exchange of Talons
On and after the Interest Payment Date on which the final Coupon comprised in any Coupon sheet matures,
the Talon (if any) forming part of such Coupon sheet may be surrendered at the specified office of the Agent
or any other Paying Agent in exchange for a further Coupon sheet including (if such further Coupon sheet
does not include Coupons to (and including) the final date for the payment of interest due in respect of the
Note to which it appertains) a further Talon, subject to the provisions of Condition 9.

14.     Notices
All notices regarding the Notes shall be published (i) in a leading English language daily newspaper of
general circulation in London, (ii) if and for so long as the Notes are listed on the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange, in a daily newspaper of general circulation in Luxembourg and (iii) if the Notes are Interbolsa
Notes, by registered mail, by publication in a leading newspaper having general circulation in Portugal
(which is expected to be Diàrio de Notícias) or by any other way which complies with the Portuguese
Securities Code and Interbolsa’s rules on notices to investors, including the disclosure of information
through the CMVM official website (www.cmvm.pt). It is expected that publication under (i) and (ii) above
will be made in the Financial Times or any other daily newspaper in London (which, unless such Notice is
given in respect of Interbolsa Notes only, shall be approved by the Trustee) and the Luxemburger Wort in
Luxembourg, respectively. In addition, all notices regarding the Notes may be published on the Luxembourg


                                                      104
Stock Exchange’s web site (www.bourse.lu). The Issuer shall also ensure that notices are duly published in
a manner which complies with the rules and regulations of any other stock exchange or any other relevant
authority on which the Notes are for the time being listed or by which they have been admitted to trading.
Any such notice will be deemed to have been given on the date of the first publication or, where required to
be published in more than one newspaper, on the date of the first publication in all the required newspapers.

Until such time as any definitive Notes are issued, there may (provided that, in the case of Notes listed on a
stock exchange or admitted to listing by another relevant authority, the rules of such stock exchange or other
relevant authority permits), so long any the global Note(s) is or are held in its/their entirety on behalf of
Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg, be substituted for such publication in such newspaper(s) the
delivery of the relevant notice to Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg for communication by them to the
holders of the Notes and, in addition, for so long as any Notes are listed on a stock exchange or are admitted
to trading by another relevant authority and the rules of that stock exchange or relevant authority so require,
such notice will be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the place or places required by
those rules. Any such notice shall be deemed to have been given to the holders of the Notes on the seventh
day after the day on which the said notice was given to Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg. However,
all notices regarding Notes which are listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange must be published in a daily
newspaper of general circulation in Luxembourg.

Notices to be given by any holder of the Notes shall be in writing and given by lodging the same with the
Portuguese Paying Agent in the case of Interbolsa Notes and by lodging the same, together with the relative
Note or Notes, with the Agent in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes. Whilst any of the Notes
are represented by a global Note, such notice may be given by any holder of a Note to the Agent via
Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, in such manner as the Agent and Euroclear
and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, may approve for this purpose.

Any holder of an Interbolsa Note may give notice to the Portuguese Paying Agent and the Agent through
Interbolsa in such manner as the Portuguese Paying Agent, the Agent and Interbolsa may approve for this
purpose.

15.   Meetings of Noteholders, Modification and Waiver

(a)   Meetings in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes
      This Condition 15(a) does not apply to Interbolsa Notes. The Trust Deed contains provisions for
      convening meetings of the Noteholders to consider any matter affecting their interests, including the
      sanctioning by Extraordinary Resolution of a modification of the terms and conditions of the Notes,
      the Receipts, the Coupons or any of the provisions of the Trust Deed. Such a meeting may be
      convened by the Issuer or Noteholders holding not less than 5 per cent. in nominal amount of the
      Notes for the time being remaining outstanding. The quorum at any such meeting for passing an
      Extraordinary Resolution is one or more persons holding or representing not less than a clear majority
      in nominal amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding, or at any adjourned meeting one or
      more persons being or representing Noteholders whatever the nominal amount of the Notes so held
      or represented, except that at any meeting the business of which includes the modification of certain
      provisions of the Notes, Receipts or Coupons (including modifying the date of maturity of the Notes
      or any date for payment of interest thereof, reducing or cancelling the amount of principal on maturity
      or otherwise, modification of any Minimum Rate of Interest or Maximum Rate of Interest or altering
      the currency of payment of the Notes, Receipts or Coupons, modification of the majority required to
      pass an Extraordinary Resolution or modification of the Trust Deed concerning this exception), the
      quorum shall be one or more persons holding or representing not less than two-thirds, or at any
      adjourned such meeting one or more persons holding or representing not less than one-third, in
      nominal amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding. An Extraordinary Resolution passed at
      any meeting of the Noteholders shall be binding on all the Noteholders, whether or not they are
      present at the meeting, and on all Receiptholders and Couponholders.

      The Trustee and the Issuer may agree, without the consent of the Noteholders, Receiptholders or
      Couponholders, to:


                                                     105
      (i)    any modification (except as mentioned above) of the Notes, the Receipts, the Coupons or the
             Trust Deed which is not, in the opinion of the Trustee, materially prejudicial to the interests of
             the Noteholders; or

      (ii)   any modification of the Notes, the Receipts, the Coupons or the Trust Deed which is of a
             formal, minor or technical nature or is made to correct a manifest error or to comply with
             mandatory provisions of the law of the jurisdiction in which the Issuer is incorporated.

      Any such modification shall be binding on the Noteholders, the Receiptholders and the
      Couponholders and any such modification shall be notified to the Noteholders in accordance with
      Condition 14 as soon as practicable thereafter.

      The Trustee may also waive or authorise any breach or proposed breach of any of the provisions of
      the Trust Deed or any of these Terms and Conditions which, in the opinion of the Trustee, is not
      materially prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders.

      In connection with the exercise by it of any of its trusts, powers or discretions (including, without
      limitation, any modification, waiver, authorisation or substitution), the Trustee shall have regard to the
      general interests of the Noteholders as a class and shall not have regard to any interests arising from
      circumstances particular to individual Noteholders (whatever their number) and, in particular, but
      without limitation, shall not have regard to the consequences of the exercise of its trusts, powers or
      discretions for individual Noteholders or Couponholders (whatever their number) resulting from their
      being for any purpose domiciled or resident in, or otherwise connected with, or subject to the
      jurisdiction of, any particular territory and the Trustee shall not be entitled to require, nor shall any
      Noteholder or Couponholder be entitled to claim, from the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
      Finance) or any other person any indemnification or payment in respect of any tax consequence of any
      such exercise upon individual Noteholders or Couponholders except to the extent already provided for
      in Condition 8 and/or any undertaking given in addition to, or in substitution for, Condition 8 pursuant
      to the Trust Deed.

      Nothing in these Terms and Conditions or the Trust Deed shall require the Trustee to have regard to
      the interests of Noteholders insofar as those interests arise by virtue of a holding of Interbolsa Notes.
      For the avoidance of doubt, without prejudice to any rights assumed under Notes which are not
      Interbolsa Notes, a holder of Interbolsa Notes shall neither, by virtue of such holding of Interbolsa
      Notes, count towards a quorum, nor be entitled to vote, in respect of a resolution to amend the Trust
      Deed.

(b)   Meetings in respect of Interbolsa Notes
      The remainder of this Condition 15 applies only to Interbolsa Notes.

      Meetings
      Meetings of the holders of Interbolsa Notes may be convened to consider any matter affecting their
      interests, including the appointment or dismissal of the Common Representative and the sanctioning
      by Extraordinary Resolution of a modification of the terms and conditions of the Notes and are
      governed by the Portuguese Commercial Companies Code enacted by Decree-Law 262/86 of 2nd
      September, as amended, and by the Common Representative Appointment Agreement.

      Such meetings may be convened by the Common Representative (if any) or, if no Common
      Representative has been appointed, or an appointed Common Representative fails to convene a
      meeting, by the chairman of the general meeting of shareholders of the Issuer, and shall be convened
      if requested by Noteholders holding not less than 5 per cent. in principal amount of the Notes for the
      time being outstanding.

      The quorum required for a meeting convened to pass a resolution other than an Extraordinary
      Resolution will be any person or persons holding or representing Notes then outstanding, regardless
      of the principal amount thereof. The quorum required for a meeting convened to pass an Extraordinary



                                                     106
Resolution will be a person or persons holding or representing at least 50 per cent. of the Notes then
outstanding or, at any adjourned meeting, any person or persons holding or representing any of the
Notes then outstanding, regardless of the principal amount thereof.

The number of votes required to pass a resolution other than an Extraordinary Resolution is a majority
of the votes cast at the relevant meeting. The majority required to pass an Extraordinary Resolution is
at least 50 per cent. of the principal amount of the Notes then outstanding or, at any adjourned
meeting, two- thirds of the votes cast at the relevant meeting.

Resolutions passed at any meeting of the Noteholders will be binding on all Noteholders, whether or
not they are present at the meeting or have voted against the approved resolutions.

Dismissal and substitution of the Common Representative
The Noteholders may dismiss and substitute the Common Representative by means of a resolution
passed for such purpose upon the terms and conditions of the Common Representative Appointment
Agreement.

Notification
Any modification, abrogation, waiver or authorisation in accordance with this Condition 15 shall be
binding on the Noteholders and shall be notified by the Issuer to the Noteholders as soon as
practicable thereafter in accordance with Condition 14 (Notices).

Matters required to be approved by Extraordinary Resolution
An Extraordinary Resolution will be required to effect any of the following:

(i)     to change any date fixed for payment of principal or interest in respect of the Notes, reduction
        of the amount of principal or interest due on any date in respect of the Notes or variation of the
        method of calculating the amount of any payment in respect of the Notes on redemption or
        maturity;

(ii)    to approve the modification or abrogation of any of the provisions of these Terms and
        Conditions;

(iii)   to approve any amendment of this definition;

(iv)    to waive or authorise any breach or proposed breach of any of these Terms and Conditions; and

(v)     to approve any other matter in respect of which these Terms and Conditions require an
        Extraordinary Resolution to be passed.

Matters in the discretion of the Agent and the Issuer
Except for those matters required to be approved by Extraordinary Resolution, the Agent, the
Common Representative and the Issuer may agree, without the consent of the Noteholders, to:

(i)     any modification of the Notes which is not materially prejudicial to the interests of the
        Noteholders; or

(ii)    any modification of the Notes which is of a formal, minor or technical nature or is made to
        correct a manifest error or to comply with mandatory provisions of the law of the jurisdiction
        in which the Issuer is incorporated.

Any such modification shall be binding on the Noteholders and shall be notified to the Noteholders
in accordance with Condition 14 as soon as practicable thereafter.




                                                107
16.    Further Issues
The Issuer shall be at liberty from time to time without the consent of the Noteholders, Receiptholders or
Couponholders to create and issue further notes having terms and conditions the same as the Notes or the
same in all respects save for the amount and date of the first payment of interest thereon and so that the same
shall be consolidated and form a single Series with the outstanding Notes.

In the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trust Deed contains provisions for convening a
single meeting of the Noteholders and the holders of notes of other Series of bearer Notes other than
Interbolsa Notes in certain circumstances where the Trustee so decides.

17.    Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999
This Condition applies if the Notes are governed by English law. No rights are conferred on any person under
the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any term of the Notes, but this does not affect
any right or remedy of any person which exists or is available apart from that Act.

18.    Substitution
In the case of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trustee may, without the consent of the Noteholders,
the Receiptholders or the Couponholders but (in the case of Dated Subordinated Notes and Undated
Subordinated Notes) only with the prior consent of the Bank of Portugal, agree with the Issuer and the Bank
(where the Issuer is BES Finance) to the substitution in place of the Issuer (or of any previous substitute
under this Condition) as the principal debtor in respect of the Notes of either the Bank or another wholly-
owned Subsidiary of the Bank, subject to:

(a)    where the new principal debtor is a wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Bank, the Notes being
       unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by the Bank on the same basis as that on which they were
       guaranteed prior to the substitution (where, immediately prior to the substitution, the Issuer is BES
       Finance or (being a previous substitute under this Condition) another wholly- owned subsidiary of the
       Bank) or on an equivalent basis to that on which they would have been guaranteed immediately prior
       to the substitution had the Issuer been BES Finance (where immediately prior to the substitution, the
       Issuer is the Bank);

(b)    the Trustee being satisfied that the interests of the Noteholders will not be materially prejudiced by
       the substitution; and

(c)    certain other conditions set out in the Trust Deed being complied with.

Any such substitution shall be notified, if the Notes are listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange or any
other stock exchange, to such stock exchange and to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14.

19.    Enforcement
In the case of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trustee may at any time, at its discretion and without
notice, take such proceedings against the Issuer and/or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) as it may
think fit to enforce the provisions of the Trust Deed, the Notes, the Receipts and the Coupons, but it shall not
be bound to take any such proceedings or any other action in relation to the Trust Deed, the Notes, the
Receipts or the Coupons unless:

(a)   it shall have been so directed by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders or so requested in
      writing by the holders of at least 20 per cent. in nominal amount of the Notes then outstanding; and

(b)   It shall have been indemnified to its satisfaction.

No Noteholder, Receiptholder or Couponholder shall be entitled to take proceedings directly against the
Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) unless the Trustee, having become bound to proceed
in accordance with the terms of the Trust Deed fails to do so within a reasonable time and such failure is
continuing.



                                                      108
In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the Common Representative may at any time, or, if so directed by an
Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders or so requested in writing by the holders of at least 20 per cent.
in nominal amount of the Notes then outstanding, shall, take such proceedings against the Issuer as it may
think fit to enforce the provisions of the Notes.

20.   Indemnification of Trustee
The Trust Deed contains provisions for the indemnification of the Trustee and for its relief from
responsibility, including provisions relieving it from any obligation to take proceedings to enforce repayment
unless indemnified to its satisfaction. The Trustee is entitled to enter into business transactions with the
Issuer and/or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) without accounting for any profit resulting
therefrom and to act as trustee for the holders of any other securities issued by the Issuer or the Bank (where
the Issuer is BES Finance).

21.   Redenomination and Exchange
This Condition 21 does not apply to Interbolsa Notes.

(a)   Redenomination
      Where redenomination is specified in the applicable Final Terms as being applicable, the Issuer may,
      without the consent of the Noteholders, the Receiptholders and the Couponholders, on giving prior
      notice to the Agent, the Trustee, Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg and at least 30 days’ prior
      notice to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14, elect that, with effect from the
      Redenomination Date specified in the notice, the Notes shall be redenominated in euro.

      The election will have effect as follows:

      (i)     the Notes and the Receipts shall be deemed to be redenominated into euro in the denomination
              of euro 0.01 with a principal amount for each Note and Receipt equal to the principal amount
              of that Note or Receipt in the Specified Currency, converted into euro at the Established Rate,
              provided that, if the Issuer determines, after consultation with the Agent and with the approval
              of the Trustee, that the then market practice in respect of the redenomination into euro of
              internationally offered securities is different from the provisions specified in this Condition 21,
              such provisions shall be deemed to be amended so as to comply with such market practice and
              the Issuer shall promptly notify the Noteholders, the stock exchange (if any) on which the
              Notes may be listed, the Paying Agents and the Trustee of such deemed amendments;

      (ii)    save to the extent that an Exchange Notice has been given in accordance with paragraph (iv)
              below, the amount of interest due in respect of the Notes will be calculated by reference to the
              aggregate principal amount of Notes held (or, as the case may be, in respect of which Coupons
              are presented) for payment by the relevant holder and the amount of such payment shall be
              rounded down to the nearest euro 0.01;

      (iii)   if definitive Notes are required to be issued after the Redenomination Date, they shall be issued
              at the expense of the Issuer in the denominations of euro 1,000, euro 10,000, euro 100,000 and
              (but only to the extent of any remaining amounts less than euro 1,000 or such smaller
              denominations as the Agent may approve) euro 0.01 and/or such other denominations as the
              Agent shall determine and notify to the Noteholders;

      (iv)    if issued prior to the Redenomination Date, all unmatured Coupons denominated in the
              Specified Currency (whether or not attached to the Notes) will become void with effect from
              the date on which the Issuer gives notice (the “Exchange Notice”) that replacement euro-
              denominated Notes, Receipts and Coupons are available for exchange (provided that such
              securities are so available) and no payments will be made in respect of them. The payment
              obligations contained in any Notes and Receipts so issued will also become void on that date
              although those Notes and Receipts will continue to constitute valid exchange obligations of the
              Issuer. New euro-denominated Notes, Receipts and Coupons will be issued in exchange for


                                                      109
             Notes, Receipts and Coupons denominated in the Specified Currency in such manner as the
             Agent may specify and as shall be notified to the Noteholders in the Exchange Notice. No
             Exchange Notice may be given less than 15 days prior to any date for payment of principal or
             interest on the Notes;

      (v)    after the Redenomination Date, all payments in respect of the Notes, the Receipts and the
             Coupons, other than payments of interest in respect of periods commencing before the
             Redenomination Date, will be made solely in euro as though references in the Notes to the
             Specified Currency were to euro. Payments will be made in euro by credit or transfer to a euro
             account (or any other account to which euro may be credited or transferred) specified by the
             payee or, at the option of the payee, by a euro cheque;

      (vi)   if the Notes are Fixed Rate Notes and interest for any period ending on or after the
             Redenomination Date is required to be calculated for a period ending other than on an Interest
             Payment Date, it will be calculated by applying the Rate of Interest to:

             (A)   in the case of Fixed Rate Notes which are either Interbolsa Notes or are represented by
                   a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, the full
                   nominal amount outstanding of the Fixed Rate Notes (or, if they are Partly Paid Notes,
                   the full amount paid up); or
             (B)   in the case of Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form, the Calculation Amount,
             and, in each case, multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction, and rounding
             the resultant figure to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any such
             subunit being rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market convention.
             Where the Specified Denomination of a Fixed Rate Note in definitive form is a multiple of the
             Calculation Amount, the amount of interest payable in respect of such Fixed Rate Note shall
             be the product of the amount (determined in the manner provided above) for the Calculation
             Amount and the amount by which the Calculation Amount is multiplied to reach the Specified
             Denomination, without any further rounding;
      (vii) if the Notes are Floating Rate Notes the applicable Final Terms specifies any relevant changes
            to the provisions relating to interest; and
      (viii) such other changes shall be made to these Terms and Conditions and/or the Trust Deed and/ or
             the Principal Agency Agreement as the Issuer and the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance)
             may decide, after consultation with the Agent and with the approval of the Trustee; and as may
             be specified in the notice, to conform them to conventions then applicable to instruments
             denominated in euro or to enable the Notes to be consolidated with one or more issues of other
             notes, whether or not originally denominated in the Specified Currency or euro. Any such other
             changes will not take effect until after they have been notified to the Noteholders in accordance
             with Condition 14.

(b)   Exchange
      Where exchange is specified in the applicable Final Terms as being applicable, the Issuer may, without
      the consent of the Noteholders, the Receiptholders and the Couponholders, on giving prior notice to
      the Agent, the Trustee, Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg and not less than 30 days’ prior
      notice to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14, elect that, with effect from the
      Redenomination Date specified in the notice, the Notes shall be exchangeable for Notes expressed to
      be denominated in euro in accordance with such arrangements as the Issuer may decide, after
      consultation with the Agent and with the approval of the Trustee and as may be specified in the notice,
      including arrangements under which Receipts and Coupons unmatured at the date so specified
      become void.




                                                    110
(c)   Definitions
      In these Terms and Conditions, the following expressions have the following meanings:
      “Established Rate” means the rate for the conversion of the Specified Currency (including compliance
      with rules relating to roundings in accordance with applicable European Union regulations) into euro
      established by the Council of the European Union pursuant to Article 109l(4) of the Treaty;
      “Euro” means the currency introduced at the start of the third stage of European economic and
      monetary union pursuant to the Treaty;
      “Redenomination Date” means (in the case of interest bearing Notes) any date for payment of interest
      under the Notes or (in the case of Zero Coupon Notes) any date, in each case specified as such by the
      Issuer in the notice given to the Noteholders pursuant to paragraph (a) or, as the case may be, (b)
      above and which falls on or after the date on which the country of the Specified Currency first
      participates in the third stage of European economic and monetary union; and
      “Treaty” means the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, as amended.

22.   Governing law and submission to jurisdiction                                                                   A5.4.2
                                                                                                                     A12.4.1.3
(a)   The Trust Deed (except clause 7 insofar as it relates to Dated Subordinated Notes and Undated
      Subordinated Notes), the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the
      extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes
      (except Conditions 2(ii) and 2(iii) in relation to the Bank only (whether in its capacity as issuer or
      guarantor), and Conditions 4(ii) and 4(iii)), the Receipts and the Coupons (and any non-contractual
      obligations arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed (except clause 7 insofar as it relates to
      Dated Subordinated Notes and Undated Subordinated Notes), the Principal Agency Agreement
      except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes (except Conditions 2(ii) and 2(iii) in relation to
      the Bank only (whether in its capacity as issuer or guarantor), and Conditions 4(ii) and 4(iii)), the
      Receipts and the Coupons) are governed by, and shall be construed in accordance with, English law.
      Interbolsa Notes, clause 7 of the Trust Deed (insofar as it relates to Dated Subordinated Notes and
      Undated Subordinated Notes), the Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to
      the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common Representative
      Appointment Agreement and Conditions 2(ii) and 2(iii) in relation to the Bank only (whether in its
      capacity as issuer or guarantor) and Conditions 4(ii) and 4(iii) (and any non-contractual obligations
      arising out of or in connection with the Interbolsa Notes, clause 7 of the Trust Deed (insofar as it relates
      to dated Subordinated Notes and Undated Subordinated Notes), the Principal Agency Agreement, in
      respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and the
      Common Representative Appointment Agreement and Conditions 2(ii) and 2(iii) in relation to the Bank
      only (whether in its capacity as issuer or guarantor) and Conditions 4(ii) and 4(iii)) are governed by, and
      shall be construed in accordance with, Portuguese law. In each case, the application of such governing
      law shall be without prejudice to the applicability, under the conflicts of rules applicable in the relevant
      forum, in the light of such submission, of Cayman Islands law (in relation to matters concerning BES
      Finance) or Portuguese law (in relation to matters concerning the Bank as an Issuer or as a guarantor, as
      the case may be).

(b)   Each of BES Finance and the Bank agrees, for the exclusive benefit of the Trustee, the Noteholders,
      the Receiptholders and the Couponholders that the courts of England are to have jurisdiction to settle
      any disputes which may arise out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency
      Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes
      Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Receipts and/or the Coupons
      (including a dispute relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with
      Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent
      amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes,
      the Receipts and/or the Coupons) and that accordingly any suit, action or proceedings (together
      referred to as “Proceedings”) arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency


                                                      111
      Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes
      Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Receipts and/or the Coupons
      (including any Proceedings relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection
      with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the
      extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa
      Notes, the Receipts and/or the Coupons) may be brought in such courts.

      The Bank agrees for the exclusive benefit of the Noteholders that the courts of Portugal are to have
      jurisdiction to settle any disputes which may arise out of or in connection with the Principal Agency
      Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes and
      that accordingly any suit action or proceedings (together referred to as “Proceedings in Respect of
      Interbolsa Notes”) arising out of or in connection with the Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of
      the Interbolsa Notes to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common
      Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes (including any Proceedings in
      Respect of Interbolsa Notes relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection
      with the Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the
      Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the
      Interbolsa Notes) may be brought in such courts.

      Each of BES Finance and the Bank hereby irrevocably waives any objection which it may have now
      or hereafter to the laying of the venue of any such Proceedings and Proceedings in respect of
      Interbolsa Notes (including any Proceedings and Proceedings in respect of Interbolsa Notes relating
      to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal
      Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes to the extent amended by the Interbolsa
      Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Receipts and/or the
      Coupons, the Principal Agency Agreement in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended
      by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement
      and/or the Interbolsa Notes) in any such court and any claim that any such Proceedings have been
      brought in an inconvenient forum and further irrevocably agrees that a judgment in any such
      Proceedings brought in the English courts or in the Portuguese courts, as the case may be, shall be
      conclusive and binding upon it and may be enforced in the courts of any other jurisdiction.

      Nothing contained in this Condition shall limit any right to take Proceedings against BES Finance or
      the Bank in any other court of competent jurisdiction, nor shall the taking of Proceedings in one or
      more jurisdictions preclude the taking of Proceedings in any other jurisdiction, whether concurrently
      or not.

      Each of the Issuers appoints the London branch of the Bank at its office in London for the time being
      (being as at 3rd November, 2010 at 10 Paternoster Square, London EC4M 7AL) as its agent for
      service of process, and undertakes that, in the event of the London branch of the Bank ceasing so to
      act, it will appoint another person as its agent for service of process in England in respect of any
      Proceedings.

      Nothing herein shall affect the right to serve proceedings in any other manner permitted by law.

23.   Common Representative
In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the holders of the Notes shall at all times be entitled to appoint and dismiss
a Common Representative by means of a resolution and pursuant to the Common Representative
Appointment Agreement. Upon the appointment of a new Common Representative by the holders of the
Notes pursuant to this Condition, any previously appointed and dismissed Common Representative will
immediately cease its engagement and will be under the obligation immediately to transfer to the new
Common Representative appointed by the holders of the Notes all documents and information then held by
such Common Representative pertaining to the Notes.




                                                     112
24.   Credit Linked Notes
If the Notes are specified as Credit Linked Notes in the applicable Final Terms then the provisions of this
Condition 24 apply as modified by the applicable Final Terms.

Unless otherwise stated in this Condition 24 or in the applicable Final Terms, in the event that any day
specified in the section “Credit Linked Notes” in the applicable Final Terms or the last day of any period
calculated by reference to calendar days falls on a day that is not a Business Day, such day or last day shall
be postponed to the next day which is a Business Day.

(a)   Redemption of Credit Linked Notes
      Unless previously redeemed or purchased and cancelled and subject as provided in Condition 24(b),
      Condition 24(c) and Condition 24(d), as applicable, each nominal amount of Notes equal to the
      Calculation Amount set out in the applicable Final Terms will be redeemed by the Issuer at its Final
      Redemption Amount specified in, or determined in the manner specified in, the applicable Final
      Terms in the relevant Specified Currency on the Maturity Date.

(b)   Auction Settlement
      If Conditions to Settlement are satisfied, then where Auction Settlement is specified as the applicable
      Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms and a Credit Event Determination Date occurs on or
      prior to the Auction Final Price Determination Date, the Issuer shall give notice (such notice an
      “Auction Settlement Notice”) to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 and, subject to any
      adjustment in accordance with Condition 24(n), redeem all but not some only of the Notes, each
      nominal amount of Notes equal to the Calculation Amount set out in the applicable Final Terms being
      redeemed by the Issuer at the Credit Event Redemption Amount in the relevant Specified Currency on
      the Credit Event Redemption Date.

      Unless settlement has occurred in accordance with the paragraph above, if:

      (i)     an Auction Cancellation Date occurs;

      (ii)    a No Auction Announcement Date occurs (and in circumstances where such No Auction
              Announcement Date occurs pursuant to paragraph (b) of the definition of No Auction
              Announcement Date, the Issuer has not exercised the Movement Option);

      (iii)   ISDA publicly announces that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has
              Resolved, following a Credit Event Resolution Request Date, not to determine the matters
              described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of Credit Event Resolution Request Date;

      (iv)    a Credit Event Determination Date was determined pursuant to paragraph (a) of the definition
              of Credit Event Determination Date and no Credit Event Resolution Request Date has occurred
              on or prior to the date falling three Business Days after such Credit Event Determination Date;
              or

      (v)     a Credit Event Determination Date was determined pursuant to paragraph (b)(B)(I) or
              (b)(B)(II) of the definition of Credit Event Determination Date,

      then:

      (A)     if Fallback Settlement Method – Cash Settlement is specified as applicable in the applicable
              Final Terms, the Issuer shall redeem the Notes in accordance with Condition 24(c) below; or

      (B)     if Fallback Settlement Method – Physical Delivery is specified as applicable in the applicable
              Final Terms, the Issuer shall redeem the Notes in accordance with Condition 24(d) below.

      If Conditions to Settlement are satisfied and the Notes become redeemable in accordance with this
      Condition 24(b), upon payment of the Credit Event Redemption Amounts in respect of the Notes,
      the Issuer shall have discharged its obligations in respect of the Notes and shall have no other
      liability or obligation whatsoever in respect thereof. The Credit Event Redemption Amount may be


                                                     113
      less than the Calculation Amount of a Note. Any shortfall shall be borne by the Noteholders and
      no liability shall attach to the Issuer or the Guarantor.

(c)   Cash Settlement
      If Conditions to Settlement are satisfied, then where Cash Settlement is specified as the applicable
      Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms or if Condition 24(b)(A) above applies, the Issuer
      shall give notice (such notice a “Cash Settlement Notice”) to the Noteholders in accordance with
      Condition 14 and redeem all but not some only of the Notes, each nominal amount of Notes equal to
      the Calculation Amount set out in the applicable Final Terms being redeemed by the Issuer at the
      Credit Event Redemption Amount in the relevant Specified Currency on the Credit Event Redemption
      Date.

      If Conditions to Settlement are satisfied and the Notes become redeemable in accordance with this
      Condition 24(c), upon payment of the Credit Event Redemption Amounts in respect of the Notes,
      the Issuer shall have discharged its obligations in respect of the Notes and shall have no other
      liability or obligation whatsoever in respect thereof. The Credit Event Redemption Amount may be
      less than the Calculation Amount of a Note. Any shortfall shall be borne by the Noteholders and
      no liability shall attach to the Issuer or the Guarantor.

(d)   Physical Settlement
      If Conditions to Settlement are satisfied, then where Physical Delivery is specified as the applicable
      Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms or if Condition 24(b)(B) above applies, the Issuer
      shall, following the receipt of a Calculation Agent Physical Settlement Notice, give notice (such
      notice a “Notice of Physical Settlement”) to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 and
      redeem all but not some only of the Notes, each nominal amount of Notes equal to the Calculation
      Amount being redeemed by the Issuer by Delivery of the Deliverable Obligations comprising the
      Asset Amount on the Settlement Date, subject to and in accordance with Conditions 24(i) and (j).

      In the Notice of Physical Settlement, the Issuer shall specify the Deliverable Obligations comprising
      the Asset Amount that it reasonably expects to Deliver. For the avoidance of doubt, the Issuer shall be
      entitled to select any of the Deliverable Obligations to constitute the Asset Amount, irrespective of
      their market value.

      The Issuer may, from time to time, amend a Notice of Physical Settlement by delivering a notice to
      Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 (each such notification, a “Physical Settlement
      Amendment Notice”) that the Issuer is replacing, in whole or in part, one or more Deliverable
      Obligations specified in the Notice of Physical Settlement or a prior Physical Settlement Amendment
      Notice, as applicable, (to the extent the relevant Deliverable Obligation has not been Delivered as of
      the date such Physical Settlement Amendment Notice is effective). A Physical Settlement Amendment
      Notice shall specify each replacement Deliverable Obligation that the Issuer will Deliver (each, a
      “Replacement Deliverable Obligation”) and shall also specify the Outstanding Principal Balance or
      Due and Payable Amount (determined on the same basis as in the definition of Asset Amount) of each
      Deliverable Obligation identified in the Notice of Physical Settlement or a prior Physical Settlement
      Amendment Notice, as applicable, that is being replaced or the equivalent Currency Amount of any
      such amount (with respect to each such Deliverable Obligation, the “Replaced Deliverable Obligation
      Outstanding Amount”). The Replacement Deliverable Obligation(s), taken together, shall have an
      aggregate Replaced Deliverable Obligation Outstanding Amount at least equal to the Outstanding
      Principal Balance(s) and/or Due and Payable Amount(s) (or the equivalent Currency Amount(s) of any
      such amount(s)) of the Deliverable Obligations being replaced. Each such Physical Settlement
      Amendment Notice must be effective on or prior to the Settlement Date (determined without reference
      to any change resulting from such Physical Settlement Amendment Notice). Notwithstanding the
      foregoing, the Issuer may correct any errors or inconsistencies contained in the Notice of Physical
      Settlement or any Physical Settlement Amendment Notice, as applicable, by notice to Noteholders (in
      accordance with Condition 14) prior to the relevant Delivery Date; it being understood that such
      notice of correction shall not constitute a Physical Settlement Amendment Notice.


                                                    114
      If “Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified as
      applicable in the applicable Final Terms and Restructuring is the only Credit Event specified in a
      Credit Event Notice, then a Deliverable Obligation may be included in the Asset Amount only if it (i)
      is a Fully Transferable Obligation and (ii) has a final maturity date not later than the applicable
      Restructuring Maturity Limitation Date.

      If “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally Transferable Obligation
      Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms and Restructuring is the only
      Credit Event specified in a Credit Event Notice, then a Deliverable Obligation may be included in the
      Asset Amount only if it (i) is a Conditionally Transferable Obligation and (ii) has a final maturity date
      not later than the applicable Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation Date.

      If Conditions to Settlement are satisfied and the Notes become redeemable in accordance with this
      Condition 24(d), upon Delivery of the Deliverable Obligations and/or payment of the Partial Cash
      Settlement Amounts, as the case may be, the Issuer shall have discharged its obligations in respect
      of the Notes and shall have no other liability or obligation whatsoever in respect thereof. The value
      of such Deliverable Obligations and/or the Partial Cash Settlement Amount, as the case may be,
      may be less than the Calculation Amount of a Note. Any shortfall shall be borne by the Noteholders
      and no liability shall attach to the Issuer or the Guarantor.

(e)   Repudiation/Moratorium Extension
      If Repudiation/Moratorium is specified as a Credit Event in the applicable Final Terms, the provisions
      of this Condition 24(e) shall apply.

      Where Conditions to Settlement have not been satisfied on or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date
      (determined by reference to the Relevant Time) but, in the determination of the Calculation Agent, the
      Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Condition has been satisfied on or prior to the Scheduled
      Termination Date or, if Condition 24(h)(y) applies, the Postponed Maturity Date (as defined in
      Condition 24(h)) and the Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date in respect of such Potential
      Repudiation Moratorium will, in the sole determination of the Calculation Agent, fall after the
      Scheduled Termination Date, then the Calculation Agent shall notify the Noteholders in accordance
      with Condition 14 that a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium has occurred and:

      (i)    where a Repudiation/Moratorium has not occurred on or prior to the Repudiation/Moratorium
             Evaluation Date:

             (A)    each nominal amount of Notes equal to the Calculation Amount will be redeemed by the
                    Issuer at the Final Redemption Amount on the fifth Business Day following the
                    Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date; and

             (B)   in the case of interest bearing Notes, the Issuer shall be obliged to pay interest calculated
                   as provided herein, accruing from (and including) the Interest Payment Date
                   immediately preceding the Scheduled Maturity Date or, if none, the Interest
                   Commencement Date to (but excluding) the Scheduled Maturity Date but shall only be
                   obliged to make such payment of interest on the fifth Business Day following the
                   Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date and no further or other amount in respect of
                   interest shall be payable and no additional amount shall be payable in respect of such
                   delay; and

      (ii)   where a Repudiation/Moratorium has occurred on or prior to the Repudiation/ Moratorium
             Evaluation Date and Conditions to Settlement are satisfied, the provisions of Condition 24(b),
             Condition 24(c) or Condition 24(d), as applicable, shall apply to the Notes.

(f)   Grace Period Extension
      If “Grace Period Extension” is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, the provisions of
      this Condition 24(f) shall apply.



                                                     115
      Where Conditions to Settlement have not been satisfied on or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date
      (determined by reference to the Relevant Time) but, in the determination of the Calculation Agent, a
      Potential Failure to Pay has occurred with respect to one or more Obligation(s) in respect of which a
      Grace Period is applicable on or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by reference to
      the Relevant Time) (and such Grace Period(s) is/are continuing as at the Scheduled Termination Date),
      then the Calculation Agent shall notify the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 that a
      Potential Failure to Pay has occurred and:

      (i)    where a Failure to Pay has not occurred on or prior to the Grace Period Extension Date:

             (A)   each nominal amount of Notes equal to the Calculation Amount will be redeemed by the
                   Issuer at the Final Redemption Amount on the fifth Business Day following the Grace
                   Period Extension Date; and

             (B)   in the case of interest bearing Notes, the Issuer shall be obliged to pay interest calculated
                   as provided herein, accruing from (and including) the Interest Payment Date
                   immediately preceding the Scheduled Maturity Date or, if none, the Interest
                   Commencement Date to (but excluding) the Scheduled Maturity Date but shall only be
                   obliged to make such payment of interest on the fifth Business Day following the Grace
                   Period Extension Date and no further or other amount in respect of interest shall be
                   payable and no additional amount shall be payable in respect of such delay; and

      (ii)   where a Failure to Pay has occurred on or prior to the Grace Period Extension Date and
             Conditions to Settlement are satisfied, the provisions of Condition 24(b), Condition 24(c) or
             Condition 24(d), as applicable, shall apply to the Notes.

(g)   Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee Extension
      If, in the determination of the Calculation Agent, a Potential Credit Event has occurred and the Credit
      Derivatives Determinations Committee has not made its determination on or prior to the Scheduled
      Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time) then the Calculation Agent shall
      notify Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 that the Maturity Date has been postponed to a
      date (the “DC Cut-off Date”) being the earliest of: (i) 15 Business Days following the date on which
      the Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee Resolves that a Credit Event has occurred; (ii) the
      date on which the Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee Resolves that a Credit Event has not
      occurred and (iii) 15 Business Days following the date on which ISDA publicly announces that the
      relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved not to determine whether a
      Credit Event has occurred and:

      (i)    where a Credit Event has not occurred on or prior to the DC Cut-off Date:

             (A)   each nominal amount of Notes equal to the Calculation Amount will be redeemed by the
                   Issuer at the Final Redemption Amount on the fifth Business Day following the DC Cut-
                   off Date; and

             (B)   in the case of interest bearing Notes, the Issuer shall be obliged to pay interest calculated
                   as provided herein, accruing from (and including) the Interest Payment Date
                   immediately preceding the Scheduled Maturity Date or if none the Interest
                   Commencement Date to (but excluding) the Scheduled Maturity Date but shall only be
                   obliged to make such payment of interest on the fifth Business Day following the DC
                   Cut-off Date and no further or other amount in respect of interest shall be payable and
                   no additional amount shall be payable in respect of such delay; or

      (ii)   where a Credit Event has occurred on or prior to the DC Cut-off Date and Conditions to
             Settlement are satisfied, the provisions of Condition 24(b), Condition 24(c) or Condition 24(d),
             as applicable, shall apply to the Notes.




                                                    116
(h)   Maturity Date Extension
      Without prejudice to Condition 24(k), if:

      (x)    on (A) the Scheduled Termination Date, (B), if applicable, the Repudiation/Moratorium
             Evaluation Date or (C) if Grace Period Extension is specified as applying in the applicable
             Final Terms, the Grace Period Extension Date, Conditions to Settlement have not been satisfied
             but, in the determination of the Calculation Agent, a Credit Event may have occurred; or

      (y)    on the Scheduled Termination Date, in the determination of the Calculation Agent, a Potential
             Repudiation/Moratorium may have occurred,

      the Calculation Agent may at its option notify the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 that
      the Maturity Date, the Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date or the Grace Period Extension Date,
      as the case may be, has been postponed to a date (such date the “Postponed Maturity Date”) specified
      in such notice falling 15 Business Days after the Scheduled Maturity Date, the
      Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date or the Grace Period Extension Date, as the case may be,
      and:

      where:

      (i)    in the case of Condition 24(h)(x), Conditions to Settlement are not satisfied on or prior to the
             Postponed Maturity Date or, in the case of Condition 24(h)(y), the Repudiation/Moratorium
             Extension Condition is not satisfied on or prior to the Postponed Maturity Date:

             (A)   subject as provided below, each nominal amount of Notes equal to the Calculation
                   Amount will be redeemed by the Issuer at the Final Redemption Amount on the fifth
                   Business Day following the Postponed Maturity Date; and

             (B)   in the case of interest bearing Notes, the Issuer shall be obliged to pay interest calculated
                   as provided herein accruing from (and including) the Interest Payment Date immediately
                   preceding the Scheduled Maturity Date or, if none, the Interest Commencement Date to
                   (but excluding) the Scheduled Maturity Date but shall only be obliged to make such
                   payment of interest on the fifth Business Day following the Postponed Maturity Date
                   and no further or other amount in respect of interest shall be payable and no additional
                   amount shall be payable in respect of such delay; or

      (ii)   where:

             (A)   in the case of Condition 24(h)(x), Conditions to Settlement are satisfied on or prior to
                   the Postponed Maturity Date, the provisions of Condition 24(b), Condition 24(c) or
                   Condition 24(d), as applicable, shall apply to the Notes; or

             (B)   in the case of Condition 24(h)(y), the Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Condition is
                   satisfied on or prior to the Postponed Maturity Date, the provisions of Condition 24(e)
                   shall apply to the Notes.

(i)   Physical Delivery
      (i)    If any Note is to be redeemed by delivery of the Asset Amount(s), in order to obtain delivery
             of such Asset Amount(s):

             (A)   if such Note is represented by a Global Note, the relevant Noteholder must deliver to
                   Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg (as applicable), with a copy to the Issuer not
                   later than the close of business in each place of reception on the Cut-Off Date, a duly
                   completed Asset Transfer Notice;

             (B)   if such Note is represented in book-entry form, the relevant Noteholder must deliver the
                   Certificate to the Portuguese Paying Agent with a copy to the Issuer not later than the




                                                    117
      close of business in each place of reception on the Cut-Off Date, together with a duly
      completed Asset Transfer Notice; and

(C)   if such Note is in definitive form, the relevant Noteholder must deliver this Note to any
      Paying Agent with a copy to the Issuer not later than the close of business in each place
      of reception on the Cut-Off Date, together with a duly completed Asset Transfer Notice.

Forms of the Asset Transfer Notice may be obtained during normal business hours from the
specified office of any Paying Agent.

An Asset Transfer Notice may only be delivered (i) if such Note is represented by a Global
Note, in such manner as is acceptable to Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case
may be, (ii) if such Note is an Interbolsa Note, in such manner as is acceptable to the
Portuguese Paying Agent, or (iii) if such Note is in definitive form, in writing or by
authenticated SWIFT message.

If this Note is in definitive form, this Note must be delivered together with the duly completed
Asset Transfer Notice.

An Asset Transfer Notice must:
(1)   specify the name and address of the relevant Noteholder, the person from whom the
      Issuer may obtain details for the delivery of the Asset Amount and any details required
      for delivery of the Asset Amount set out in the applicable Final Terms;
(2)   in the case of (i) Notes represented by a Global Note, specify the nominal amount of
      Notes which are the subject of such notice and the number of the Noteholder’s account
      at Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, to be debited with such
      Notes and irrevocably instruct and authorise Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as
      the case may be, to debit the relevant Noteholder’s account with such Notes, or
      (ii) Interbolsa Notes, specify the nominal amount of Notes which are the subject of such
      notice and relevant individual securities account to be debited with such Notes and
      irrevocably instruct and authorise the Portuguese Paying Agent to debit the relevant
      individual securities account with such Notes, in each case, on or before the Settlement
      Date;
(3)   include an undertaking to pay all Delivery Expenses and, in the case of (i) Notes
      represented by a Global Note, an authority to debit a specified account of the Noteholder
      at Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, in respect thereof or
      (ii) Interbolsa Notes, an authority to debit a specified individual securities account, and
      in case, to pay such Delivery Expenses;
(4)   specify an account to which any amounts payable pursuant to Condition 24(j) or any
      other cash amounts specified in the applicable Final Terms as being payable are to be
      paid; and
(5)   authorise the production of such notice in any applicable administrative or legal
      proceedings.

No Asset Transfer Notice may be withdrawn after receipt thereof by Euroclear or Clearstream,
Luxembourg, the Portuguese Paying Agent or a Paying Agent, as the case may be, as provided
above. After delivery of an Asset Transfer Notice, the relevant Noteholder may not transfer the
Notes which are the subject of such notice.

In the case of (i) Notes represented by a Global Note, upon receipt of such notice, Euroclear or
Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, shall verify that the person specified therein as
the Noteholder is the holder of the specified nominal amount of Notes according to its books
or (ii) Interbolsa Notes, upon receipt of such notice, the Portuguese Paying Agent shall verify




                                       118
        that the person specified therein as the Noteholder is the holder of the specified nominal
        amount of Notes according to the Book Entry Registry.

        Failure properly to complete and deliver an Asset Transfer Notice may result in such notice
        being treated as null and void. Any determination as to whether such notice has been properly
        completed and delivered as provided in these Terms and Conditions shall be made, in the case
        of (i) Notes represented by a Global Note, by Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the
        case may be, (ii) Interbolsa Notes, by the Portuguese Paying Agent, or (iii) Notes in definitive
        form, by the relevant Paying Agent, in each case, after consultation with the Issuer or the
        Guarantor, as applicable, and shall be conclusive and binding on the Issuer, the Guarantor and
        the relevant Noteholder.

        Delivery of the Asset Amount(s) in respect of each Note shall be made at the risk of the relevant
        Noteholder in such commercially reasonable manner as the Calculation Agent shall determine
        and notify to the person designated by the Noteholder in the relevant Asset Transfer Notice or
        in such manner as is specified in the applicable Final Terms.

        If a Noteholder fails to give an Asset Transfer Notice as provided herein on or prior to the Cut-
        Off Date specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Issuer or the Guarantor, as the case may
        be, will, subject as provided above, deliver the Deliverable Obligations constituting the Asset
        Amount in respect of the relevant Notes as soon as practicable after the receipt of the duly
        completed Asset Transfer Notice, provided that if, in respect of a Note, a Noteholder fails to
        give an Asset Transfer Notice prior to the day falling 180 calendar days after the Cut-Off Date,
        the obligations of the Issuer and the Guarantor in respect of such Notes shall be discharged and
        neither the Issuer nor the Guarantor shall have any liability in respect thereof.

(ii)    All Delivery Expenses arising from the delivery of the Asset Amount in respect of any Notes
        shall be for the account of the relevant Noteholder and no delivery of any Asset Amount shall
        be made until all Delivery Expenses have been paid to the satisfaction of the Issuer by the
        relevant Noteholder.

        After delivery of an Asset Amount in respect of a Note and for the Intervening Period, none of
        the Issuer, the Guarantor, the Calculation Agent and any other person shall at any time (i) be
        under any obligation to deliver or procure delivery to any Noteholder any letter, certificate,
        notice, circular or any other document or, except as provided herein, payment whatsoever
        received by that person in respect of the securities or obligations included in such Asset
        Amount, (ii) be under any obligation to exercise or procure exercise of any or all rights
        attaching to such securities or obligations included in such Asset Amount or (iii) be under any
        liability to a Noteholder in respect of any loss or damage which such Noteholder may sustain
        or suffer as a result, whether directly or indirectly, of that person being registered during such
        Intervening Period as legal owner of such securities or obligations included in such Asset
        Amount.

(iii)   In relation to each Deliverable Obligation constituting any Asset Amount, the Issuer will
        Deliver or procure the Delivery of the relevant Deliverable Obligation as provided below on the
        Settlement Date Provided That if all or some of the Deliverable Obligations included in the
        Asset Amount in respect of a Note are Undeliverable Obligations and/or Hedge Disruption
        Obligations, then the Issuer shall continue to attempt to Deliver all or a portion of such
        Undeliverable Obligations or Hedge Disruption Obligations, as the case may be, on or before
        the 30th Business Day following the Settlement Date (the “Final Delivery Date”),

        Provided Further That if all or a portion of such Undeliverable Obligations or Hedge Disruption
        Obligations, as the case may be, are not Delivered by the Final Delivery Date the provisions of
        Condition 24(j) shall apply.




                                                119
(j)   Partial Cash Settlement
      If all or a portion of the Obligations comprising the Asset Amount are Undeliverable Obligations
      and/or Hedge Disruption Obligations, the Issuer shall give notice (a “Partial Cash Settlement Notice”)
      to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 and the Issuer shall pay in respect of each
      Undeliverable Obligation and/or Hedge Disruption Obligation, as the case may be, the Partial Cash
      Settlement Amount on the Partial Cash Settlement Date.

      In the Partial Cash Settlement Notice, the Issuer must give details of why it is unable to deliver the
      relevant Undeliverable Obligations or Hedge Disruption Obligation, as the case may be.

      Unless otherwise specified in the applicable Final Terms, for the purposes of this Condition 24(j) only
      the following terms shall be defined as follows:

      “Indicative Quotation” means, in accordance with the Quotation Method, each quotation obtained
      from a Quotation Dealer at the Valuation Time for (to the extent reasonably practicable) an amount of
      the Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge Disruption Obligations, as the case may be, equal to the
      Quotation Amount, which reflects such Quotation Dealer’s reasonable assessment of the price of such
      Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge Disruption Obligation, as the case may be, based on such factors
      as such Quotation Dealer may consider relevant, which may include historical prices and recovery
      rates.

      “Market Value” means, with respect to an Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge Disruption Obligation,
      as the case may be, on a Valuation Date, (i) if more than three Full Quotations are obtained, the
      arithmetic mean of such Full Quotations, disregarding the Full Quotations having the same highest
      and lowest values (and, if more than one such Full Quotations have the same highest or lowest value,
      then one of such highest or lowest Full Quotations shall be disregarded); (ii) if exactly three Full
      Quotations are obtained, the Full Quotation remaining after disregarding the highest and lowest Full
      Quotations (and, if more than one such Full Quotations have the same highest value or lowest value,
      then one of such highest or lowest Full Quotations shall be disregarded); (iii) if exactly two Full
      Quotations are obtained, the arithmetic mean of such Full Quotations; (iv) if fewer than two
      Full Quotations are obtained and a Weighted Average Quotation is obtained, such Weighted Average
      Quotation; (v) if Indicative Quotations are specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms and
      exactly three Indicative Quotations are obtained, the Indicative Quotation remaining after
      disregarding the highest and lowest Indicative Quotations (and, if more than one such Indicative
      Quotations have the same highest or lowest value, then one of such highest or lowest Indicative
      Quotations shall be disregarded); (vi) if fewer than two Full Quotations are obtained and no Weighted
      Average Quotation is obtained (and, if Indicative Quotations are applicable, fewer than three
      Indicative Quotations are obtained) then, subject to paragraph (ii) of the definition of “Quotation”
      below, an amount as determined by the Calculation Agent on the next Business Day on which at least
      two Full Quotations or a Weighted Average Quotation or, if applicable, three Indicative Quotations are
      obtained; and (vii) if the Quotations are deemed to be zero, the Market Value shall be zero.

      “Partial Cash Settlement Amount” is deemed to be, for an Undeliverable Obligation or a Hedge
      Disruption Obligation, as the case may be, an amount calculated by the Calculation Agent equal to
      the greater of (i) (A) the Outstanding Principal Balance, the Due and Payable Amount or the Currency
      Amount, as applicable, of each Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge Disruption Obligation, as the case
      may be, multiplied by (B) the Final Price or the Auction Final Price, if applicable, with respect to such
      Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge Disruption Obligation, as the case may be, less if applicable
      (C) Unwind Costs, if any (but excluding any Unwind Costs already taken into account in calculating
      the relevant Asset Amount), and (ii) zero.

      “Partial Cash Settlement Date” is deemed to be the date falling three Business Days after (i) the
      calculation of the Final Price or (ii) the Auction Final Price Determination Date, if applicable.

      “Quotation” means each Full Quotation, the Weighted Average Quotation and, if Indicative
      Quotations are specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, each Indicative Quotation obtained
      and expressed as a percentage with respect to a Valuation Date in the manner that follows:


                                                     120
(i)     The Calculation Agent shall attempt to obtain Full Quotations with respect to each Valuation
        Date from five or more Quotation Dealers. If the Calculation Agent is unable to obtain two or
        more such Full Quotations on the same Business Day within three Business Days of a Valuation
        Date, then on the next following Business Day (and, if necessary, on each Business Day
        thereafter until the tenth Business Day following the relevant Valuation Date) the Calculation
        Agent shall attempt to obtain Full Quotations from five or more Quotation Dealers, and, if two
        or more Full Quotations are not available, a Weighted Average Quotation. If two or more such
        Full Quotations or a Weighted Average Quotation are not available on any such Business Day
        and Indicative Quotations are specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, the
        Calculation Agent shall attempt to obtain three Indicative Quotations from five or more
        Quotation Dealers.

(ii)    If the Calculation Agent is unable to obtain two or more Full Quotations or a Weighted Average
        Quotation (or, if Indicative Quotations are specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms,
        three Indicative Quotations) on the same Business Day on or prior to the tenth Business Day
        following the Valuation Date, the Quotations shall be deemed to be any Full Quotation obtained
        from a Quotation Dealer at the Valuation Time on such tenth Business Day of, if no Full
        Quotation is obtained, the weighted average of any firm quotations (or, if applicable, Indicative
        Quotations) for the Undeliverable Obligation or the Hedge Disruption Obligation, as the case
        may be, obtained from Quotation Dealers at the Valuation Time on such tenth Business Day
        with respect to the aggregate portion of the Quotation Amount for which such quotations were
        obtained and a quotation deemed to be zero for the balance of the Quotation Amount for which
        firm quotations (or, if applicable, Indicative Quotations) were not obtained on such day.

(iii)   The Calculation Agent shall determine, based on the then current market practice in the market
        of the relevant Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge Disruption Obligations, as the case may be,
        whether such Quotations shall include or exclude accrued but unpaid interest. All Quotations
        shall be obtained in accordance with this specification or determination.

(iv)    If any Quotation obtained with respect to an Accreting Obligation is expressed as a percentage
        of the amount payable in respect of such obligation at maturity, such Quotation will instead be
        expressed as a percentage of the Outstanding Principal Balance for purposes of determining the
        Final Price.

“Quotation Amount” is deemed to be, with respect to each type or issue of Undeliverable Obligation
or Hedge Disruption Obligation, as the case may be, an amount equal to the Outstanding Principal
Balance or Due and Payable Amount (or, in either case, its equivalent in the relevant Obligation
Currency converted by the Calculation Agent by reference to exchange rates in effect at the time that
the relevant Quotation is being obtained), as applicable, of such Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge
Disruption Obligations, as the case may be.

“Quotation Method” is deemed to be Bid.

“Reference Obligation” is deemed to be each Undeliverable Obligation or Hedge Disruption
Obligation, as the case may be.

“Valuation Method” is deemed to be Highest unless fewer than two Full Quotations are obtained or a
Weighted Average Quotation applies (or, if applicable, Indicative Quotations), in which case
“Valuation Method” is deemed to be Market.

“Valuation Time” is the time specified as such in the applicable Final Terms, or, if no time is so
specified, 11.00 a.m. in the principal trading market for the Undeliverable Obligation or the Hedge
Disruption Obligation, as the case may be.

“Weighted Average Quotation” means, in accordance with the Quotation Method, the weighted
average of firm quotations obtained from Quotation Dealers at the Valuation Time, to the extent
reasonably practicable, each for an amount of the Undeliverable Obligation or the Hedge Disruption
Obligation, as the case may be, with an Outstanding Principal Balance of as large a size as available


                                               121
      but less than the Quotation Amount that in aggregate are approximately equal to the Quotation
      Amount.

(k)   Settlement Suspension

      (i)    Suspension
             Without prejudice to Condition 24(h) above, if, following the determination of a Credit Event
             Determination Date in accordance with sub-paragraph (a) of the definition of Credit Event
             Determination Date but prior to the Settlement Date or, to the extent applicable, a Valuation
             Date, ISDA publicly announces that the conditions to convening a Credit Derivatives
             Determinations Committee to Resolve the matters described in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of
             the definition of Credit Event Resolution Request Date are satisfied in accordance with the
             Rules, the Calculation Agent may, at its option, determine that the applicable timing
             requirements of this Condition 24 and the definitions of Credit Event Redemption Date,
             Valuation Date, Physical Settlement Period, and any other provision in this Condition 24 as
             determined by the Calculation Agent, shall toll and be suspended and remain suspended (such
             period of suspension, a “Suspension Period”) until such time as ISDA subsequently publicly
             announces that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved (a) the
             matters described in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of Credit Event Resolution
             Request Date or (b) not to determine such matters. Once ISDA has publicly announced that the
             relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved (A) the matters described
             in sub-paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of Credit Event Resolution Request Date or (B)
             not to determine such matters, the relevant timing requirements of this Condition 24 that have
             previously tolled or been suspended shall resume on the Business Day following such public
             announcement by ISDA.

             In the event of any such Suspension Period, the Calculation Agent may make (x) such
             consequential or other adjustment(s) or determination(s) to or in relation to these Terms and
             Conditions as may be desirable or required either during or following any relevant Suspension
             Period to account for or reflect such suspension and (y) determine the effective date of such
             adjustment(s) or determination(s).

      (ii)   Interest
             In the case of interest bearing Notes:

             (A)    if a Suspension Period falls in any one or more Interest Period(s), then no interest (or
                    any interest on any delayed payment of interest) shall accrue during each portion of an
                    Interest Period during which a Suspension Period exists; and

             (B)    if an Interest Payment Date falls in a Suspension Period, such Interest Payment Date will
                    be deferred until such date as determined by the Calculation Agent falling no earlier than
                    the first Interest Payment Date and no later than the fifth Interest Payment Date
                    following the end of the Suspension Period, all subject to the provisions of Condition 5
                    and Conditions 24(e), (f) and (g).

(l)   Redemption following a Merger Event
      If “Merger Event” is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, in the event that in the
      determination of the Calculation Agent a Merger Event has occurred, the Issuer may give notice to the
      Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 and redeem all but not some only of the Notes and pay
      in respect of each nominal amount of the Notes equal to the Calculation Amount the Early
      Redemption Amount on the Merger Event Redemption Date.

(m)   Definitions applicable to Credit Linked Notes
      “2.5-year Limitation Date” has the meaning given to that term in the definition of “Limitation Date”.



                                                      122
“5-year Limitation Date” has the meaning given to that term in the definition of “Limitation Date”.

“20-year Limitation Date” has the meaning given to that term in the definition of “Limitation Date”.

“2005 Matrix Supplement” means the 2005 Matrix Supplement to the 2003 ISDA Credit Derivatives
Definitions as published by ISDA on 7th March, 2005.

“Accreted Amount” means, with respect to an Accreting Obligation, an amount equal to (a) the sum
of (i) the original issue price of such obligation and (ii) the portion of the amount payable at maturity
that has accreted in accordance with the terms of the obligation (or as otherwise described below), less
(b) any cash payments made by the obligor thereunder that, under the terms of such obligation, reduce
the amount payable at maturity (unless such cash payments have been accounted for in (a)(ii) above),
in each case calculated as of the earlier of (A) the date on which any event occurs that has the effect
of fixing the amount of a claim in respect of principal and (B) the Delivery Date or applicable
Valuation Date, as the case may be. Such Accreted Amount shall include any accrued and unpaid
periodic cash interest payments (as determined by the Calculation Agent) only if “Include Accrued
Interest” is specified as being applicable in the applicable Final Terms. If an Accreting Obligation is
expressed to accrete pursuant to a straight-line method or if such Obligation’s yield to maturity is not
specified in, nor implied from, the terms of such Obligation, then, for the purposes of (a)(ii) above,
the Accreted Amount shall be calculated using a rate equal to the yield to maturity of such Obligation.
Such yield shall be determined on a semi-annual bond equivalent basis using the original issue price
of such obligation and the amount payable at the scheduled maturity of such obligation, and shall be
determined as of the earlier of (A) the date on which any event occurs that has the effect of fixing the
amount of a claim in respect of principal and (B) the Delivery Date or applicable Valuation Date, as
the case may be. The Accreted Amount shall exclude, in the case of an Exchangeable Obligation, any
amount that may be payable under the terms of such obligation in respect of the value of the Equity
Securities for which such obligation is exchangeable.

“Accreting Obligation” means any obligation (including, without limitation, a Convertible Obligation
or an Exchangeable Obligation), the terms of which expressly provide for an amount payable upon
acceleration equal to the original issue price (whether or not equal to the face amount thereof) plus an
additional amount or amounts (on account of original issue discount or other accruals of interest or
principal not payable on a periodic basis) that will or may accrete, whether or not (a) payment of such
additional amounts is subject to a contingency or determined by reference to a formula or index, or
(b) periodic cash interest is also payable.

“Affiliate” means, in relation to any entity (the “First Entity”), any entity controlled, directly or
indirectly, by the First Entity, any entity that controls, directly or indirectly, the First Entity or any
entity directly or indirectly under common control with the First Entity. For these purposes “control”
means ownership of a majority of the voting power of an entity.

“Asset Amount” means, in respect of each nominal amount of Notes equal to the Calculation Amount,
Deliverable Obligations, as selected by the Calculation Agent, with:

(i)    in the case of Deliverable Obligations that are Borrowed Money, an Outstanding Principal
       Balance (including accrued but unpaid interest (as determined by the Calculation Agent) if
       “Include Accrued Interest” is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, but excluding
       accrued but unpaid interest if “Exclude Accrued Interest” is specified as applying in the
       applicable Final Terms, and if neither “Include Accrued Interest” nor “Exclude Accrued
       Interest” is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, excluding accrued but unpaid
       interest); or

(ii)   in the case of Deliverable Obligations that are not Borrowed Money, a Due and Payable
       Amount,

(or, in the case of either (i) or (ii), the equivalent Currency Amount of any such amount), in an
aggregate amount as of the relevant Delivery Date equal to the Calculation Amount less, if Unwind
Costs are specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, Deliverable Obligations with a market


                                               123
value determined by the Calculation Agent on the Business Day selected by the Calculation Agent
falling during the period from and including the Credit Event Determination Date to and including the
Delivery Date equal to the Unwind Costs.

If an obligation by its terms represents or contemplates an obligation to pay an amount greater than
the Outstanding Principal Balance of such obligation as of the Delivery Date as a result of the
occurrence or non-occurrence of an event or circumstance, the Outstanding Principal Balance of such
obligation shall not include any additional amount that would be payable upon the occurrence or non-
occurrence of such event or circumstance.

“Asset Transfer Notice” means a duly completed asset transfer notice which as at the Issue Date is
substantially in the form set out in the relevant Part of the Schedule to these Terms and Conditions,
and may be amended from time to time by the Issuer and is available on request from any of the
Paying Agents.

“Auction” shall have the meaning as shall be set forth in the relevant Transaction Auction Settlement
Terms.

“Auction Cancellation Date” shall have the meaning as shall be set forth in the relevant Transaction
Auction Settlement Terms.

“Auction Covered Transaction” shall have the meaning as shall be set forth in the relevant Transaction
Auction Settlement Terms.

“Auction Final Price” shall have the meaning as shall be set forth in the relevant Transaction Auction
Settlement Terms.

“Auction Final Price Determination Date” shall have the meaning as shall be set forth in the relevant
Transaction Auction Settlement Terms.

“Auction Settlement Date” shall mean the date that is the number of Business Days as shall be
specified in the relevant Transaction Auction Settlement Terms (or, if a number of Business Days is
not so specified, five Business Days) immediately following the Auction Final Price Determination
Date.

“Auction Settlement Notice” has the meaning given to that term in Condition 24(b).

“Bankruptcy” means a Reference Entity:

(a)   is dissolved (other than pursuant to a consolidation, amalgamation or merger);

(b)   becomes insolvent or is unable to pay its debts or fails or admits in writing in a judicial,
      regulatory or administrative proceeding or filing its inability generally to pay its debts as they
      become due;

(c)   makes a general assignment, arrangement or composition with or for the benefit of its creditors;

(d)   institutes or has instituted against it a proceeding seeking a judgment of insolvency or
      bankruptcy or any other relief under any bankruptcy or insolvency law or other similar law
      affecting creditors’ rights, or a petition is presented for its winding-up or liquidation, and, in
      the case of any such proceeding or petition instituted or presented against it, such proceeding
      or petition (i) results in a judgment of insolvency or bankruptcy or the entry of an order for
      relief or the making of an order for its winding-up or liquidation or (ii) is not dismissed,
      discharged, stayed or restrained in each case within 30 calendar days of the institution or
      presentation thereof or before the Scheduled Termination Date, whichever is earlier;

(e)   has a resolution passed for its winding-up, official management or liquidation (other than
      pursuant to a consolidation, amalgamation or merger);




                                              124
(f)    seeks or becomes subject to the appointment of an administrator, provisional liquidator,
       conservator, receiver, trustee, custodian or other similar official for it or for all or substantially
       all its assets;

(g)    has a secured party take possession of all or substantially all its assets or has a distress,
       execution, attachment, sequestration or other legal process levied, enforced or sued on or
       against all or substantially all its assets and such secured party maintains possession, or any
       such process is not dismissed, discharged, stayed or restrained, in each case within 30 calendar
       days thereafter or before the Scheduled Termination Date, whichever is earlier; or

(h)    causes or is subject to any event with respect to it which, under the applicable laws of any
       jurisdiction, has any analogous effect to any of the events specified in clauses (a) to (g)
       (inclusive).

“Best Available Information” means:

(i)    in the case of a Reference Entity which files information with its primary securities regulator
       or primary stock exchange that includes unconsolidated, pro forma financial information which
       assumes that the relevant Succession Event has occurred or which provides such information
       to its shareholders, creditors or other persons whose approval of the Succession Event is
       required, that unconsolidated, pro forma financial information and, if provided subsequently to
       the provision of unconsolidated, pro forma financial information but before the Calculation
       Agent makes its determination for the purposes of the definition of “Successor”, other relevant
       information that is contained in any written communication provided by the Reference Entity
       to its primary securities regulator, primary stock exchange, shareholders, creditors or other
       persons whose approval of the Succession Event is required; or

(ii)   in the case of a Reference Entity which does not file with its primary securities regulators or
       primary stock exchange, or which does not provide to shareholders, creditors or other persons
       whose approval of the Succession Event is required, the information contemplated in (i) above,
       the best publicly available information at the disposal of the Calculation Agent to allow it to
       make a determination for the purposes of the definition of “Successor”.

Information which is made available more than 14 calendar days after the legally effective date of the
Succession Event shall not constitute “Best Available Information”.

“Calculation Agent City Business Day” means a day on which commercial banks and foreign
exchange markets are generally open to settle payments in the Calculation Agent City specified in the
applicable Final Terms.

“Calculation Agent Physical Settlement Notice” has the meaning given to that term in the definition
of Conditions to Settlement.

“Cash Settlement Notice” has the meaning given to that term in Condition 24(c).

“Conditionally Transferable Obligation” means a Deliverable Obligation that is either Transferable, in
the case of Bonds, or capable of being assigned or novated to all Modified Eligible Transferees
without the consent of any person being required, in the case of any Deliverable Obligation other than
Bonds, provided, however, that a Deliverable Obligation other than Bonds will be a Conditionally
Transferable Obligation notwithstanding that consent of the Reference Entity or the guarantor, if any,
of a Deliverable Obligation other than Bonds (or the consent of the relevant obligor if a Reference
Entity is guaranteeing such Deliverable Obligation) or any agent is required for such novation,
assignment or transfer so long as the terms of such Deliverable Obligation provide that such consent
may not be unreasonably withheld or delayed. Any requirement that notification of novation,
assignment or transfer of a Deliverable Obligation be provided to a trustee, fiscal agent, administrative
agent, clearing agent or paying agent for a Deliverable Obligation shall not be considered to be a
requirement for consent for purposes of this definition of “Conditionally Transferable Obligation”.




                                                125
For purposes of determining whether a Deliverable Obligation satisfies the requirements of the
definition of Conditionally Transferable Obligation, such determination shall be made as of the
Delivery Date for the Deliverable Obligation, taking into account only the terms of the Deliverable
Obligation and any related transfer or consent documents which have been obtained by the Issuer or
the Guarantor, as the case may be.

“Conditions to Settlement” means the requirements set out in each of (a), (b) and (c), as applicable,
below:

(a)   all of the Conditions to Settlement shall be deemed to be satisfied by the occurrence of a Credit
      Event Determination Date except where such Credit Event Determination Date is subsequently
      reversed prior to the Auction Final Price Determination Date, a Valuation Date, the Settlement
      Date, the Credit Event Redemption Date or the Maturity Date, as applicable, unless Physical
      Delivery is specified as the applicable Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms (or is
      applicable pursuant to the Fallback Settlement Method) in which case all of the Conditions to
      Settlement shall be deemed to be satisfied by delivery of a Calculation Agent Physical
      Settlement Notice as described in (c) below on or following the occurrence of a Credit Event
      Determination Date;

(b)   if Notice of Publicly Available Information is specified as applicable in the applicable Final
      Terms, the Notice of Publicly Available Information Condition to Settlement is satisfied if
      either (i) the Calculation Agent delivers to the Issuer a Notice of Publicly Available Information
      that is effective during one of the periods specified in paragraph (a) of the definition of Credit
      Event Determination Date or (ii) ISDA publicly announces on or prior to the last day of the
      Notice Delivery Period (including prior to the Trade Date) that the relevant Credit Derivatives
      Determinations Committee has Resolved that an event that constitutes a Credit Event for
      purposes of the relevant Notes has occurred with respect to the relevant Reference Entity or
      Obligation thereof; and

(c)   the Calculation Agent delivers to the Issuer a notice of physical settlement (a “Calculation
      Agent Physical Settlement Notice”), subject where applicable to Condition 24(k), on or prior
      to:

      (i)    the later of:

             (A)    the 32nd calendar day (subject to adjustment in accordance with the applicable
                    Business Day Convention) after the Credit Event Determination Date; and

             (B)    the 12th calendar day after either (I) the date of the relevant DC Credit Event
                    Announcement, if any, or (II) the date on which ISDA publicly announces that the
                    relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved not to
                    determine the matters described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of
                    Credit Event Resolution Request Date; or

      (ii)   if “Physical Delivery” is applicable pursuant to the Fallback Settlement Method and:

             (A)    the relevant Credit Event is not a Restructuring (or, if such Credit Event is a
                    Restructuring, such Restructuring has occurred where neither “Restructuring
                    Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable Obligation Applicable” nor
                    “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally Transferable
                    Obligation Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms),
                    the 32nd calendar day after the Auction Cancellation Date or the No Auction
                    Announcement Date, as applicable; or

             (B)    the relevant Credit Event is a Restructuring and either “Restructuring Maturity
                    Limitation and Fully Transferable Obligation Applicable” or “Modified




                                              126
                     Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally Transferable Obligation
                     Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, either:

                     I.     the 32nd calendar day after:

                            (1)    a No Auction Announcement Date occurring pursuant to paragraph
                                   (a) of the definition of No Auction Announcement Date, if any; or

                            (2)    a No Auction Announcement Date occurring pursuant to paragraph
                                   (c) of the definition of No Auction Announcement Date, if any, in
                                   circumstances where no Parallel Auction will be held; or

                            (3)    the Auction Cancellation Date, if any; or

                     II.    the second Relevant City Business Day immediately following the later of
                            the Parallel Auction Final Price Determination Date, if any (or, if more
                            than one should occur, the last Parallel Auction Final Price Determination
                            Date), and the Parallel Auction Cancellation Date, if any (or, if more than
                            one should occur, the last Parallel Auction Cancellation Date), as
                            applicable, in circumstances where either:

                            (1)    a No Auction Announcement Date occurs pursuant to paragraph (b)
                                   of the definition of No Auction Announcement Date and the Issuer
                                   has not exercised the Movement Option; or

                            (2)    a No Auction Announcement Date occurs pursuant to paragraph (c)
                                   of the definition of No Auction Announcement Date in
                                   circumstances where one or more Parallel Auctions will be held,

       provided that in the case of paragraphs (c)(i)(B) and (c)(ii), the relevant Credit Event
       Resolution Request Date occurred on or prior to the date described in paragraph (c)(i)(A).

       For purposes of determining whether the conditions of this paragraph (c) have been satisfied,
       the effective date of delivery of the Calculation Agent Physical Settlement Notice (whether or
       not subsequently changed) shall be used.

“Convertible Obligation” means any obligation that is convertible, in whole or in part, into Equity
Securities solely at the option of holders of such obligation or a trustee or similar agent acting for the
benefit only of holders of such obligation (or the cash equivalent thereof, whether the cash settlement
option is that of the issuer or of (or for the benefit of) the holders of such obligation).

“Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement Terms” means any Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement
Terms published by ISDA, in accordance with the Rules, a form of which will be published by ISDA
on its website at www.isda.org (or any successor website thereto) from time to time and may be
amended from time to time in accordance with the Rules.

“Credit Derivatives Determinations Committees” and each a “Credit Derivatives Determinations
Committee” means the committees established by ISDA for purposes of reaching certain DC
Resolutions in connection with credit derivative transactions, as more fully described in the Credit
Derivatives Determinations Committees Rules, as published by ISDA on its website at www.isda.org
(or any successor website thereto) from time to time and as amended from time to time in accordance
with the terms thereof (the “Rules”).

“Credit Event” means the occurrence of any one or more of the Credit Events specified in the
applicable Final Terms which may include Bankruptcy, Failure to Pay, Obligation Acceleration,
Obligation Default, Repudiation/Moratorium or Restructuring, or any additional Credit Event
specified in the applicable Final Terms.




                                               127
If an occurrence would otherwise constitute a Credit Event, such occurrence will constitute a Credit
Event whether or not such occurrence arises directly or indirectly from, or is subject to a defence
based upon:

(a)   any lack or alleged lack of authority or capacity of a Reference Entity to enter into any
      Obligation or, as applicable, an Underlying Obligor to enter into any Underlying Obligation;

(b)   any actual or alleged unenforceability, illegality, impossibility or invalidity with respect to any
      Obligation or, as applicable, any Underlying Obligation, however described;

(c)   any applicable law, order, regulation, decree or notice, however described, or the promulgation
      of, or any change in, the interpretation by any court, tribunal, regulatory authority or similar
      administrative or judicial body with competent or apparent jurisdiction of any applicable law,
      order, regulation, decree or notice, however described; or

(d)   the imposition of, or any change in, any exchange controls, capital restrictions or any other
      similar restrictions imposed by any monetary or other authority, however described.

“Credit Event Backstop Date” means:

(a)   for purposes of any event that constitutes a Credit Event (or with respect to
      Repudiation/Moratorium, the event described in paragraph (b) of the definition of
      Repudiation/Moratorium), as determined by DC Resolution, the date that is 60 calendar days
      prior to the Credit Event Resolution Request Date; or

(b)   otherwise, the date that is 60 calendar days prior to the earlier of:

      (i)    the first date on which both the Credit Event Notice and, if Notice of Publicly Available
             Information is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, the Notice of
             Publicly Available Information are delivered by the Calculation Agent to the Issuer
             during the Notice Delivery Period; and

      (ii)   in circumstances where:

             (A)    the conditions to convening a Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee to
                    Resolve the matters described in paragraph (a) and (b) of the definition of Credit
                    Event Resolution Request Date are satisfied in accordance with the Rules;

             (B)    the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved not to
                    determine such matters; and

             (C)    the Credit Event Notice and, if Notice of Publicly Available Information is
                    specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, the Notice of Publicly
                    Available Information are delivered by the Calculation Agent to the Issuer not
                    more than 14 calendar days after the day on which ISDA publicly announces that
                    the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved not to
                    determine such matters,

             the Credit Event Resolution Request Date.

      The Credit Event Backstop Date shall not be subject to adjustment in accordance with any
      Business Day Convention.

“Credit Event Determination Date” means, in respect of any Credit Event:

(a)   subject to subsection (b) below, if neither a DC Credit Event Announcement nor a DC No
      Credit Event Announcement has occurred, the first date on which both the Credit Event Notice
      and, if Notice of Publicly Available Information is specified as applicable in the applicable
      Final Terms, the Notice of Publicly Available Information are delivered by the Calculation
      Agent to the Issuer during either:


                                              128
      (A)    the Notice Delivery Period; or

      (B)    the period (I) from, and including, the date on which ISDA publicly announces that the
             relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved not to determine
             the matters described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of the definition of Credit Event
             Resolution Request Date (II) to, and including, the date that is 14 calendar days
             thereafter (provided that the relevant Credit Event Resolution Request Date occurred on
             or prior to the end of the last day of the Notice Delivery Period (including prior to the
             Trade Date)); or

(b)   notwithstanding paragraph (a) above, if a DC Credit Event Announcement has occurred, either:

      (A)    the Credit Event Resolution Request Date, if

             I.     either:

                    (1)       Auction Settlement is specified as the applicable Settlement Method in the
                              applicable Final Terms; or

                    (2)       the relevant Credit Event is a Restructuring; and

             II.    the Credit Event Notice is delivered by the Calculation Agent to the Issuer on or
                    prior to the date falling two Business Days after the Exercise Cut-off Date; or

      (B)    the first date on which the Credit Event Notice is delivered by the Calculation Agent to
             the Issuer during (I) the Notice Delivery Period or (II) the period from, and including,
             the date on which ISDA publicly announces the occurrence of the relevant DC Credit
             Event Announcement to, and including, the date that is 14 calendar days thereafter
             (provided that the relevant Credit Event Resolution Request Date occurred on or prior
             to the end of the last day of the Notice Delivery Period (including prior to the Trade
             Date)), if either:

             I.     Auction Settlement is not specified as the applicable Settlement Method in the
                    applicable Final Terms; or

             II.    Auction Settlement is specified as the applicable Settlement Method in the
                    applicable Final Terms and the Credit Event Notice is delivered by the
                    Calculation Agent to the Issuer on a date that is later than the date falling two
                    Business Days after the relevant Exercise Cut-off Date,

provided that, in the case of paragraph (b) above, (1) this shall be subject to any adjustment in
accordance with Condition 24(n) and (2) no Credit Event Notice specifying a Restructuring as the
only Credit Event has previously been delivered by the Calculation Agent to the Issuer unless the
Restructuring specified in such Credit Event Notice is also the subject of the notice to ISDA resulting
in the occurrence of the Credit Event Resolution Request Date; and

provided further that no Credit Event Determination Date will occur, and any Credit Event
Determination Date previously determined with respect to an event shall be deemed not to have
occurred, if, or to the extent that, prior to the Auction Final Price Determination Date, a Valuation
Date, the Settlement Date, the Credit Event Redemption Date or the Maturity Date, as applicable, a
DC No Credit Event Announcement Date occurs with respect to the relevant Reference Entity or
Obligation thereof.

If, in accordance with the provisions above, (i) following the determination of a Credit Event
Determination Date, such Credit Event Determination Date is deemed (A) to have occurred on a date
that is different from the date that was originally determined to be the Credit Event Determination
Date or (B) not to have occurred or (ii) a Credit Event Determination Date is deemed to have occurred
prior to one or more preceding Interest Payment Dates, the Calculation Agent will determine (1) such
adjustment(s) to this Condition 24 (including any adjustment to payment amounts) as may be required


                                                129
to achieve as far as practicable the same economic position of Noteholders as would have prevailed
had a Credit Event Determination Date occurred on such deemed date of occurrence and (2) the
effective date of such adjustment(s).

“Credit Event Notice” means a notice from the Calculation Agent to the Issuer (which the Calculation
Agent has the right but not the obligation to deliver) that describes a Credit Event that occurred at or
after the Credit Backstop Date Time (determined by reference to the Relevant Time) and on or prior
to the Extension Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time).

A Credit Event Notice must contain a description in reasonable detail of the facts relevant to the
determination that a Credit Event has occurred. The Credit Event that is the subject of the Credit Event
Notice need not be continuing on the date the Credit Event Notice is effective. A Credit Event Notice
shall be subject to the requirements regarding notices set out in Condition 14.

“Credit Event Redemption Amount” means the amount specified as such in the applicable Final Terms
or if no such amount is specified in the applicable Final Terms, an amount calculated by the
Calculation Agent equal to:

                                              (A x B) – C
where:
“A” is the Calculation Amount;
“B” is the Final Price or the Auction Final Price, as applicable; and

“C” is Unwind Costs,

provided that in no event shall the Credit Event Amount be less than zero.

“Credit Event Redemption Date” means, subject to Condition 24(k), the day falling the number of
Business Days specified in the applicable Final Terms after (i) the calculation of the Final Price or (ii)
the Auction Settlement Date, as applicable.

“Credit Event Resolution Request Date” means, with respect to a notice to ISDA, delivered in
accordance with the Rules, requesting that a Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee be
convened to Resolve:

(a)    whether an event that constitutes a Credit Event has occurred with respect to the relevant
       Reference Entity or Obligation thereof; and

(b)    if the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee Resolves that such event has
       occurred, the date of the occurrence of such event,

the date, as publicly announced by ISDA, that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations
Committee Resolves to be the first date on which such notice was effective and on which the relevant
Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee was in possession, in accordance with the Rules, of
Publicly Available Information with respect to the DC Resolutions referred to in paragraphs (a) and
(b) above.

As at the date hereof, the Rules provide that each “Eligible Market Participant” (being each party
which is a party to a credit derivatives transaction that have, or are deemed to have incorporated the
March 2009 Supplement or the July 2009 Supplement in a confirmation) is permitted to deliver such
a notice to ISDA pursuant to the Rules.

“Currency Amount” means, with respect to (a) a Deliverable Obligation specified in a Notice of
Physical Settlement that is denominated in a currency other than the Settlement Currency, an amount
converted to the Settlement Currency using a conversion rate determined by reference to the Currency
Rate and (b) a Replacement Deliverable Obligation specified in a Physical Settlement Amendment
Notice, an amount converted to the Settlement Currency (or, if applicable, back into the Settlement
Currency) using a conversion rate determined by reference to the Currency Rate, if any, and each


                                               130
Revised Currency Rate used to convert each Replaced Deliverable Obligation Outstanding Amount
specified in each Physical Settlement Amendment Notice with respect to that portion of the relevant
Notes into the currency of denomination of the relevant Replacement Deliverable Obligation.

“Currency Rate” means, with respect to (a) a Deliverable Obligation specified in the Notice of
Physical Settlement, the rate of conversion between the Settlement Currency and the currency in
which the Outstanding Principal Balance or Due and Payable Amount of such Deliverable Obligation
is denominated that is either (i) determined by reference to the Currency Rate Source as at the Next
Currency Fixing Time or (ii) if such rate is not available at such time, determined by the Calculation
Agent and (b) a Replacement Deliverable Obligation specified in a Physical Settlement Amendment
Notice, the Revised Currency Rate.

“Currency Rate Source” means the mid-point rate of conversion published by WM/Reuters at
4.00 p.m. (London time), or any successor rate source approved by the relevant Credit Derivatives
Determinations Committee.

“DC Credit Event Announcement” means, with respect to a Reference Entity, a public announcement
by ISDA that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved that (a) an
event that constitutes a Credit Event has occurred with respect to such Reference Entity (or an
Obligation thereof) and (b) such event occurred on or after the Credit Event Backstop Date
(determined by reference to the Relevant Time) and on or prior to the Extension Date (determined by
reference to the Relevant Time). A DC Credit Event Announcement will be deemed not to have
occurred unless (i) the Credit Event Resolution Request Date with respect to such Credit Event
occurred on or prior to the end of the last day of the Notice Delivery Period (including prior to the
Trade Date) and (ii) the Trade Date occurs on or prior to the Auction Final Price Determination Date,
the Auction Cancellation Date, or the date that is 21 calendar days following the No Auction
Announcement Date, if any, as applicable.

“DC Cut-off Date” has the meaning given to that term in Condition 24(g).

“DC No Credit Event Announcement” means, with respect to a Reference Entity, a public
announcement by ISDA that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved,
following a Credit Event Resolution Request Date, that the event that is the subject of the notice to
ISDA resulting in the occurrence of such Credit Event Resolution Request Date does not constitute a
Credit Event with respect to such Reference Entity (or an Obligation thereof).

“DC Resolution” has the meaning set out in the Rules.

“Default Requirement” means the amount specified as such in the applicable Final Terms or its
equivalent in the relevant Obligation Currency or, if a Default Requirement is not specified in the
applicable Final Terms, U.S.$10,000,000, or its equivalent as calculated by the Calculation Agent in
the relevant Obligation Currency, in either case, as of the occurrence of the relevant Credit Event.

“Deliver” means to deliver, novate, transfer (including, in the case of a Qualifying Guarantee, transfer
of the benefit of the Qualifying Guarantee), assign or sell, as appropriate, in the manner customary for
the settlement of the applicable Deliverable Obligations (which shall include executing all necessary
documentation and taking any other necessary actions), in order to convey all right, title and interest
in the Asset Amount(s) to the relevant Noteholder free and clear of any and all liens, charges, claims
or encumbrances (including without limitation any counterclaim, defence (other than a counterclaim
or defence based on the factors set out in (a) to (d) in the definition of “Credit Event” above or right
of set-off by or of the Reference Entity or, as applicable, an Underlying Obligor) provided that if all
or a portion of an Asset Amount consists of Direct Loan Participations, “Deliver” means to create (or
procure the creation) of a participation in favour of the relevant Noteholder and to the extent that the
Deliverable Obligations consist of Qualifying Guarantees, “Deliver” means to Deliver both the
Qualifying Guarantee and the Underlying Obligation. “Delivery” and “Delivered” will be construed
accordingly. In the case of a Loan, Delivery shall be effected using documentation substantially in the




                                              131
form of the documentation customarily used in the relevant market for Delivery of such Loan at that
time.

“Deliverable Obligation” means, subject as provided in Condition 24(c):

(a)   any obligation of a Reference Entity (either directly, as provider of a Qualifying Affiliate
      Guarantee or, if All Guarantees is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, as
      provider of any Qualifying Guarantee) determined pursuant to the method described in “(A)
      Method for Determining Deliverable Obligations” below (but excluding any Excluded
      Deliverable Obligation specified in the applicable Final Terms) that (i) is payable in an amount
      equal to its Outstanding Principal Balance or Due and Payable Amount, as applicable, (ii) is
      not subject to any counterclaim, defence (other than a counterclaim or defence based on the
      factors set forth in paragraphs (a) to (d) of the definition of “Credit Event” above)) or right of
      set off by or of a Reference Entity or, as applicable, an Underlying Obligor and (iii) in the case
      of a Qualifying Guarantee other than a Qualifying Affiliate Guarantee, is capable, at the
      Delivery Date, of immediate assertion or demand by or on behalf of the holder or holders
      against the Reference Entity for an amount at least equal to the Outstanding Principal Balance
      or Due and Payable Amount being Delivered apart from the giving of any notice of non-
      payment or similar procedural requirement, it being understood that acceleration of an
      Underlying Obligation shall not be considered a procedural requirement;

(b)   subject to the second paragraph of the definition of “Not Contingent” in “(A) Method for
      Determining Deliverable Obligations” below, each Reference Obligation, unless specified in
      the applicable Final Terms as an Excluded Deliverable Obligation;

(c)   solely in relation to a Restructuring Credit Event applicable to a Sovereign Reference Entity,
      any Sovereign Restructured Deliverable Obligation (but excluding any Excluded Deliverable
      Obligation) that (i) is payable in an amount equal to its Outstanding Principal Balance or Due
      and Payable Amount, as applicable, (ii) is not subject to any counterclaim, defence (other than
      a counterclaim or defence based on the factors set forth in paragraphs (a)-(d) of the definition
      of “Credit Event” above) or right of set-off by or of a Reference Entity or, as applicable, an
      Underlying Obligor and (iii) in the case of a Qualifying Guarantee other than a Qualifying
      Affiliate Guarantee, is capable, at the Delivery Date, of immediate assertion or demand by or
      on behalf of the holder or holders against the Reference Entity for an amount at least equal to
      the Outstanding Principal Balance or Due and Payable Amount being Delivered apart from the
      giving of any notice of non-payment or similar procedural requirement, it being understood that
      acceleration of an Underlying Obligation shall not be considered a procedural requirement; and

(d)   any Additional Deliverable Obligation of a Reference Entity specified as such in the applicable
      Final Terms.

      (A)    Method for Determining Deliverable Obligations. For the purposes of this definition of
             “Deliverable Obligation”, the term “Deliverable Obligation” may be defined as each
             obligation of each Reference Entity described by the Deliverable Obligation Category
             specified in the applicable Final Terms, and, subject to (B)(3) below, having each of the
             Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, if any, specified in the applicable Final Terms, in
             each case, as of the date of the event which constitutes the Credit Event which is the
             subject of either the Credit Event Notice or the notice to ISDA resulting in the
             occurrence of the Credit Event Resolution Request Date, as applicable. The following
             terms shall have the following meanings:

             (1)   “Deliverable Obligation Category” means one of Payment, Borrowed Money,
                   Reference Obligations Only, Bond, Loan, or Bond or Loan (each as defined in the
                   definition of “Obligation” below, except that, for the purpose of determining
                   Deliverable Obligations, the definition of “Reference Obligations Only” shall be
                   amended to state that no Deliverable Obligation Characteristics shall be
                   applicable to Reference Obligations Only).


                                              132
(2)   “Deliverable Obligation Characteristics” means any one or more of Not
      Subordinated, Specified Currency, Not Sovereign Lender, Not Domestic
      Currency, Not Domestic Law, Listed, Not Domestic Issuance (each as defined in
      the definition of “Obligation” below), Not Contingent, Assignable Loan, Consent
      Required Loan, Direct Loan Participation, Transferable, Maximum Maturity,
      Accelerated or Matured and Not Bearer where:

      (i)     “Not Contingent” means any obligation having as of the Delivery Date and
              all times thereafter an Outstanding Principal Balance or, in the case of
              obligations that are not Borrowed Money, a Due and Payable Amount, that
              pursuant to the terms of such obligation may not be reduced as a result of
              the occurrence or non-occurrence of an event or circumstance (other than
              payment). A Convertible Obligation, an Exchangeable Obligation and an
              Accreting Obligation shall constitute Deliverable Obligations that are Not
              Contingent if such Deliverable Obligation otherwise meets the
              requirements of the preceding sentence so long as, in the case of a
              Convertible Obligation or an Exchangeable Obligation, the right (A) to
              convert or exchange such obligation or (B) to require the issuer to purchase
              or redeem such obligation (if the issuer has exercised the right to pay the
              purchase or redemption price, in whole or in part, in Equity Securities) has
              not been exercised (or such exercise has been effectively rescinded) on or
              before the Delivery Date.

              If a Reference Obligation is a Convertible Obligation or an Exchangeable
              Obligation, then such Reference Obligation may be included as a
              Deliverable Obligation only if the rights referred to in clauses (A) and (B)
              of paragraph (i) above have not been exercised (or such exercise has been
              effectively rescinded) on or before the Delivery Date.

      (ii)    “Assignable Loan” means a Loan that is capable of being assigned or
              novated to, at a minimum, commercial banks or financial institutions
              (irrespective of their jurisdiction of organisation) that are not then a lender
              or a member of the relevant lending syndicate, without the consent of the
              relevant Reference Entity or the guarantor, if any, of such Loan (or the
              consent of the applicable borrower if a Reference Entity is guaranteeing
              such Loan) or any agent;

      (iii)   “Consent Required Loan” means a Loan that is capable of being assigned
              or novated with the consent of the relevant Reference Entity or the
              guarantor, if any, of such Loan (or the consent of the relevant borrower if
              a Reference Entity is guaranteeing such loan) or any agent;

      (iv)    “Direct Loan Participation” means a Loan in respect of which, pursuant to
              a participation agreement, the Issuer is capable of creating, or procuring
              the creation of, a contractual right in favour of each Noteholder that
              provides each Noteholder with recourse to the participation seller for a
              specified share in any payments due under the relevant Loan which are
              received by such participation seller, any such agreement to be entered into
              between each Noteholder and either (A) the Issuer or the Guarantor, as the
              case may be, (to the extent that the Issuer or the Guarantor, as applicable,
              is then a lender or a member of the relevant lending syndicate), or (B) a
              Qualifying Participation Seller (if any) (to the extent such Qualifying
              Participation Seller is then a lender or a member of the relevant lending
              syndicate);

      (v)     “Transferable” means an obligation that is transferable to institutional
              investors without any contractual, statutory or regulatory restriction,


                                 133
                   provided that none of the following shall be considered contractual,
                   statutory or regulatory restrictions:

                   (a)    contractual, statutory or regulatory restrictions that provide for
                          eligibility for resale pursuant to Rule 144A or Regulation S
                          promulgated under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as
                          amended (and any contractual, statutory or regulatory restrictions
                          promulgated under the laws of any jurisdiction having a similar
                          effect in relation to the eligibility for resale of an obligation); or

                   (b)    restrictions on permitted investments such as statutory or regulatory
                          investment restrictions on insurance companies and pension funds;

            (vi)   “Maximum Maturity” means an obligation that has a remaining maturity
                   from the Settlement Date of not greater than the period specified in the
                   applicable Final Terms;

            (vii) “Accelerated or Matured” means an obligation under which the total
                  amount owed, whether at maturity, by reason of acceleration, upon
                  termination or otherwise (other than amounts in respect of default interest,
                  indemnities, tax gross-ups and other similar amounts), is, or on or prior to
                  the Delivery Date will be, due and payable in full in accordance with the
                  terms of such obligation, or would have been but for, and without regard
                  to, any limitation imposed under any applicable insolvency laws; and

            (viii) “Not Bearer” means any obligation that is not a bearer instrument unless
                   interests with respect to such bearer instrument are cleared via Euroclear,
                   Clearstream, Luxembourg or any other internationally recognised clearing
                   system.

(B)   Interpretation of Provisions.

      (1)   If the Obligation Characteristic “Listed” is specified in the applicable Final
            Terms, the Final Terms shall be construed as though Listed had been specified as
            an Obligation Characteristic only with respect to Bonds and shall only be relevant
            if Bonds are covered by the selected Obligation Category;

      (2)   if (i) either of the Deliverable Obligation Characteristics “Listed” or “Not Bearer”
            is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Final Terms shall be construed as
            though such Deliverable Obligation Characteristic had been specified as a
            Deliverable Obligation Characteristic only with respect to Bonds and shall only
            be relevant if Bonds are covered by the selected Deliverable Obligation Category;
            (ii) the Deliverable Obligation Characteristic “Transferable” is specified in the
            applicable Final Terms, the Final Terms shall be construed as though such
            Deliverable Obligation Characteristic had been specified as a Deliverable
            Obligation Characteristic only with respect to Deliverable Obligations that are not
            Loans (and shall only be relevant to the extent that obligations other than Loans
            are covered by the selected Deliverable Obligation Category); or (iii) any of the
            Deliverable Obligation Characteristics “Assignable Loan”, “Consent Required
            Loan” or “Direct Loan Participation” is specified in the applicable Final Terms,
            the Final Terms shall be construed as though such Deliverable Obligation
            Characteristic had been specified as a Deliverable Obligation Characteristic only
            with respect to Loans and shall only be relevant if Loans are covered by the
            selected Deliverable Obligation Category;

      (3)   if any of Payment, Borrowed Money, Loan or Bond or Loan is specified as the
            Deliverable Obligation Category and more than one of Assignable Loan, Consent
            Required Loan and Direct Loan Participation are specified as Deliverable


                                      134
      Obligation Characteristics, the Deliverable Obligations may include any Loan
      that satisfies any one of such Deliverable Obligation Characteristics specified and
      need not satisfy all such Deliverable Obligation Characteristics; and

(4)   in the event that an Obligation or a Deliverable Obligation is a Qualifying
      Guarantee, the following will apply:

      (i)     For purposes of the application of the Obligation Category or the
              Deliverable Obligation Category, the Qualifying Guarantee shall be
              deemed to be described by the same category or categories as those that
              describe the Underlying Obligation.

      (ii)    For purposes of the application of the Obligation Characteristics or the
              Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, both the Qualifying Guarantee and
              the Underlying Obligation must satisfy on the relevant date each of the
              applicable Obligation Characteristics or the Deliverable Obligation
              Characteristics, if any, specified in the applicable Final Terms from the
              following list: Specified Currency, Not Sovereign Lender, Not Domestic
              Currency and Not Domestic Law. For these purposes, unless otherwise
              specified in the applicable Final Terms, (A) the lawful currency of any of
              Canada, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom or the United States of
              America or the euro shall not be a Domestic Currency and (B) the laws of
              England and the laws of the State of New York shall not be a Domestic
              Law.

      (iii)   For purposes of the application of the Obligation Characteristics or the
              Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, only the Qualifying Guarantee
              must satisfy on the relevant date the Obligation Characteristic or the
              Deliverable Obligation Characteristic of Not Subordinated, if specified in
              the applicable Final Terms.

      (iv)    For purposes of the application of the Obligation Characteristics or the
              Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, only the Underlying Obligation
              must satisfy on the relevant date each of the applicable Obligation
              Characteristics or the Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, if any,
              specified in the applicable Final Terms from the following list: Listed, Not
              Contingent, Not Domestic Issuance, Assignable Loan, Consent Required
              Loan, Direct Loan Participation, Transferable, Maximum Maturity,
              Accelerated or Matured and Not Bearer.

      (v)     For purposes of the application of the Obligation Characteristics or the
              Deliverable Obligation Characteristics to an Underlying Obligation,
              references to the Reference Entity shall be deemed to refer to the
              Underlying Obligor.

      (vi)    The terms “Outstanding Principal Balance” and “Due and Payable
              Amount” (as they are used in these Terms and Conditions, including
              without limitation, the definitions of “Cash Settlement Amount” and
              “Quotation Amount” in Condition 24(j)), when used in connection with
              Qualifying Guarantees are to be interpreted to be the then “Outstanding
              Principal Balance” or “Due and Payable Amount”, as applicable, of the
              Underlying Obligation which is supported by a Qualifying Guarantee.

              For the avoidance of doubt the provisions of this paragraph (B) apply in
              respect of the definitions of Obligation and Deliverable Obligation as the
              context admits.




                                135
“Deliverable Obligation Terms” has the meaning set forth in the relevant Credit Derivatives Auction
Settlement Terms.

“Delivery Date” means, with respect to a Deliverable Obligation, the date such Deliverable Obligation
is Delivered.

“Delivery Expenses” means all costs, taxes, duties and/or expenses, including stamp duty, stamp duty
reserve tax and/or other costs, duties or taxes arising from the Delivery of the Asset Amount.

“Domestic Currency” means the currency specified as such in the applicable Final Terms and any
successor currency. If no currency is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Domestic Currency
shall be the lawful currency and any successor currency of (a) the relevant Reference Entity, if the
Reference Entity is a Sovereign, or (b) the jurisdiction in which the relevant Reference Entity is
organised, if the Reference Entity is not a Sovereign. In no event shall Domestic Currency include any
successor currency if such successor currency is the lawful currency of any of Canada, Japan,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom or the United States of America or the euro (or any successor
currency to any such currency).

“Downstream Affiliate” means an entity, at the date of the event giving rise to the Credit Event which
is the subject of the Credit Event Notice, the Delivery Date or the time of identification of a Substitute
Reference Obligation (as applicable), whose outstanding Voting Shares are more than 50 per cent.
owned, directly or indirectly, by the Reference Entity. “Voting Shares” shall mean those shares or
other interests that have the power to elect the board of directors or similar governing body of an
entity.

“Due and Payable Amount” means, subject as provided in sub-paragraph (4)(vi) of paragraph (B)
(Interpretation of Provisions) in the definition of Deliverable Obligation, the amount that is due and
payable under (and in accordance with the terms of) a Deliverable Obligation on the Delivery Date,
whether by reason of acceleration, maturity, termination or otherwise (excluding sums in respect of
default interest, indemnities, tax gross-ups and other similar amounts).

“Eligible Transferee” means:
(a)    any
       (i)     bank or other financial institution;
       (ii)    insurance or reinsurance company;
       (iii)   mutual fund, unit trust or similar collective investment vehicle (other than an entity
               specified in sub-paragraph (c)(i) below); and
       (iv)    registered or licensed broker or dealer (other than a natural person or proprietorship),

       provided, however, in each case that such entity has total assets or at least U.S.$500 million;

(b)    an Affiliate of an entity specified in the preceding sub-paragraph (a);

(c)    each of a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, organisation, trust or other entity:
       (i)     that is an investment vehicle (including, without limitation, any hedge fund, issuer of
               collateralised debt obligations, commercial paper conduit or other special purpose
               vehicle) that (1) has total assets of at least U.S.$100 million or (2) is one of a group of
               investment vehicles under common control or management having, in the aggregate,
               total assets of at least U.S.$100 million; or
       (ii)    that has total assets of at least U.S.$500 million; or
       (iii)   the obligations of which under an agreement, contract or transaction are guaranteed or
               otherwise supported by a letter of credit or keepwell, support, or other agreement by an
               entity described in sub-paragraphs (a), (b), (c)(ii) or (d); or

(d)    a Sovereign, Sovereign Agency or Supranational Organisation;


                                                136
All references in this definition to U.S.$ include equivalent amounts in other currencies.

“Enabling Obligation” means an outstanding Deliverable Obligation that (i) is a Fully Transferable
Obligation or a Conditionally Transferable Obligation, as applicable, and (ii) has a final maturity date
occurring on or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date and following the Limitation Date
immediately preceding the Scheduled Termination Date (or, in circumstances where the Scheduled
Termination Date occurs prior to the 2.5-year Limitation Date, following the final maturity date of the
Latest Maturity Restructured Bond or Loan, if any).

“Equity Securities” means:

(a)    in the case of a Convertible Obligation, equity securities (including options and warrants) of
       the issuer of such obligation or depositary receipts representing equity securities of the issuer
       of such obligation together with any other property distributed to or made available to holders
       of those equity securities from time to time; and

(b)    in the case of an Exchangeable Obligation, equity securities (including options and warrants)
       of a person other than the issuer of such obligation or depositary receipts representing those
       equity securities of a person other than the issuer of such obligation together with any other
       property distributed to or made available to holders of those equity securities from time to time.

“Exchangeable Obligation” means any obligation that is exchangeable, in whole or in part, for Equity
Securities solely at the option of holders of such obligation or a trustee or similar agent acting for the
benefit only of holders of such obligation (or the cash equivalent thereof, whether the cash settlement
option is that of the issuer or of (or for the benefit of) the holders of such obligation).

“Excluded Deliverable Obligation” means any obligation of a Reference Entity specified as such or
of a type described in the applicable Final Terms.

“Excluded Obligation” means any obligation of a Reference Entity specified as such or of a type
described in the applicable Final Terms.

“Exercise Cut-off Date” means, with respect to a Credit Event:

(a)    if such Credit Event is not a Restructuring (or if such Credit Event is a Restructuring, such
       Restructuring has occurred and neither “Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully
       Transferable Obligation Applicable” nor “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and
       Conditionally Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable
       Final Terms), either:

       (i)     the Relevant City Business Day prior to the Auction Final Price Determination Date, if
               any;

       (ii)    the Relevant City Business Day prior to the Auction Cancellation Date, if any; or

       (iii)   the date that is 21 calendar days following the No Auction Announcement Date, if any,

       as applicable; or

(b)    if such Credit Event is a Restructuring and either “Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully
       Transferable Obligation Applicable” or “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and
       Conditionally Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable
       Final Terms and:

       (i)     the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved that
               Transaction Auction Settlement Terms and/or Parallel Auction Settlement Terms may be
               published, the date that is five Relevant City Business Days following the date on which
               ISDA publishes the Final List applicable to such Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement
               Terms in accordance with the Rules; or



                                               137
      (ii)   a No Auction Announcement Date occurs pursuant to paragraph (a) of the definition of
             No Auction Announcement Date, the date that is 21 calendar days following such No
             Auction Announcement Date.

“Extension Date” means the latest of:

(a)   the Scheduled Termination Date;

(b)   the Grace Period Extension Date if (i) “Grace Period Extension” is specified as applying in the
      applicable Final Terms, (ii) the Credit Event that is the subject of the Credit Event Notice or
      the notice to ISDA resulting in the occurrence of the Credit Event Resolution Request Date, as
      applicable, is a Failure to Pay that occurs after the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by
      reference to the Relevant Time), and (iii) the Potential Failure to Pay with respect to such
      Failure to Pay occurs on or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by reference
      to the Relevant Time); and

(c)   the Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date if (i) “Repudiation Moratorium” is specified as a
      Credit Event in the applicable Final Terms, (ii) the Credit Event that is the subject of the Credit
      Event Notice or the notice to ISDA resulting in the occurrence of the Credit Event Resolution
      Request Date, as applicable, is a Repudiation/Moratorium for which the event described in
      paragraph (b) of the definition of Repudiation/Moratorium occurs after the Scheduled
      Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time), (iii) the Potential
      Repudiation/Moratorium with respect to such Repudiation/Moratorium occurs on or prior to
      the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time) and (iv) the
      Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Condition is satisfied.

“Failure to Pay” means after the expiration of any applicable Grace Period (after the satisfaction of
any conditions precedent to the commencement of such Grace Period), the failure by a Reference
Entity to make, when and where due, any payments in an aggregate amount of not less than the
Payment Requirement under one or more Obligations in accordance with the terms of such
Obligations at the time of such failure.

“Fallback Settlement Method” means, with respect to any Notes for which Auction Settlement is
specified as the applicable Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms, the fallback settlement
method specified in the applicable Final Terms.

“Final Delivery Date” is as defined in Condition 24(i).

“Final List” has the meaning set out in the Rules.

“Final Price” means the price of the relevant Reference Obligation(s), as the case may be, expressed
as a percentage, determined in accordance with the Valuation Method specified in the applicable Final
Terms or, where applicable, Condition 24(j). The Calculation Agent shall as soon as practicable after
obtaining all Quotations for a Valuation Date, make available for inspection by Noteholders at the
specified office of the Agent and, for so long as the Notes are listed on the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange at the office of the Paying Agent in Luxembourg (i) each such Quotation that it receives in
connection with the calculation of the Final Price and (ii) a written computation showing its
calculation of the Final Price.

“Full Quotation” means, in accordance with the Quotation Method each firm quotation obtained from
a Quotation Dealer at the Valuation Time, to the extent reasonably practicable, for an amount of the
Reference Obligation with an Outstanding Principal Balance equal to the Quotation Amount.

“Fully Transferable Obligation” means a Deliverable Obligation that is either Transferable, in the case
of Bonds, or capable of being assigned or novated to all Eligible Transferees without the consent of
any person being required in the case of any Deliverable Obligation other than Bonds. Any
requirement that notification of novation, assignment or transfer of a Deliverable Obligation be
provided to a trustee, fiscal agent, administrative agent, clearing agent or paying agent for a



                                              138
Deliverable Obligation shall not be considered as a requirement for consent for purposes of this
definition of “Fully Transferable Obligation”. For purposes of determining whether a Deliverable
Obligation satisfies the requirements of this definition of “Fully Transferable Obligation”, such
determination shall be made as of the Delivery Date for the relevant Deliverable Obligation, taking
into account only the terms of the Deliverable Obligation and any related transfer or consent
documents which have been obtained by the Issuer or the Guarantor, as the case may be.

“Governmental Authority” means any de facto or de jure government (or any agency, instrumentality,
ministry or department thereof), court, tribunal, administrative or other governmental authority or any
other entity (private or public) charged with the regulation of the financial markets (including the
central bank) of a Reference Entity or of the jurisdiction of organisation of a Reference Entity.

“Grace Period” means:

(a)   subject to paragraphs (b) and (c) below, the applicable grace period with respect to payments
      under the relevant Obligation under the terms of such Obligation in effect as of the date as of
      which such Obligation is issued or incurred;

(b)   if Grace Period Extension is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, a Potential
      Failure to Pay has occurred on or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by
      reference to the Relevant Time) and the applicable grace period cannot, by its terms, expire on
      or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time), the
      Grace Period shall be deemed to be the lesser of such grace period and the period specified as
      such in the applicable Final Terms or, if no period is specified in the applicable Final Terms,
      30 calendar days; and

(c)   if, as of the date as of which an Obligation is issued or incurred, no grace period with respect
      to payments or a grace period with respect to payments of less than three Grace Period
      Business Days is applicable under the terms of such Obligation, a Grace Period of three Grace
      Period Business Days shall be deemed to apply to such Obligation; provided that, unless Grace
      Period Extension is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms, such deemed Grace
      Period shall expire no later than the Scheduled Termination Date.

“Grace Period Business Day” means a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets
are generally open to settle payments in the place or places and on the days specified for that purpose
in the relevant Obligation and if a place or places are not so specified, in the jurisdiction of the
Obligation Currency.

“Grace Period Extension Date” means, if:

(a)   Grace Period Extension is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms; and

(b)   a Potential Failure to Pay occurs on or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by
      reference to the Relevant Time),

the date falling the number of days in the Grace Period after the date of such Potential Failure to Pay.

“Hedge Disruption Event” means in the opinion of the Calculation Agent any event as a result of
which the Issuer and/or any of its Affiliates has not received the relevant Deliverable Obligations
under the terms of any transaction entered into by the Issuer and/or any such Affiliate to hedge the
obligations or position of the Issuer in respect of the Notes.

“Hedge Disruption Obligation” means a Deliverable Obligation included in the Asset Amount which,
on the Settlement Date for such Deliverable Obligation, the Calculation Agent determines cannot be
Delivered as a result of a Hedge Disruption Event.

“Intervening Period” means such period of time as any person other than the relevant Noteholder shall
continue to be registered as the legal owner of any securities or other obligations comprising the Asset
Amount.


                                              139
“ISDA” means the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc.

“Latest Maturity Restructuring Bond or Loan” has the meaning given to that term in the definition of
“Restructuring Maturity Limitation Date”.

“Limitation Date” means the first of 20th March, 20th June, 20th September or 20th December in any
year to occur on or immediately following the date that is one of the following numbers of years after
the Restructuring Date: 2.5 years (the “2.5-year Limitation Date”), 5 years (the “5-year Limitation
Date”), 7.5 years, 10 years, 12.5 years, 15 years, or 20 years (the “20-year Limitation Date”), as
applicable. Limitation Dates shall not be subject to adjustment in accordance with any Business Day
Convention unless it is specified in the applicable Final Terms that Limitation Dates will be adjusted
in accordance with a specified Business Day Convention.

“London Business Day” means a day (other than a Saturday or a Sunday) on which banks and foreign
exchange markets are open for general business in London.

“Market Value” means, with respect to a Reference Obligation on a Valuation Date:

(a)   if more than three Full Quotations are obtained, the arithmetic mean of such Full Quotations,
      disregarding the Full Quotations having the highest and lowest values (and, if more than one
      such Full Quotations have the same highest value or lowest value, then one of such highest or
      lowest Full Quotations shall be disregarded);

(b)   if exactly three Full Quotations are obtained, the Full Quotation remaining after disregarding
      the highest and lowest Full Quotations (and, if more than one such Full Quotations have the
      same highest value or lowest value, then one of such highest or lowest Full Quotations shall be
      disregarded);

(c)   if exactly two Full Quotations are obtained, the arithmetic mean of such Full Quotations;

(d)   if fewer than two Full Quotations and a Weighted Average Quotation is obtained, such
      Weighted Average Quotation;

(e)   if fewer than two Full Quotations are obtained and no Weighted Average Quotation is obtained,
      subject as provided in the definition of Quotation, an amount as determined by the Calculation
      Agent on the next Business Day on which two or more Full Quotations or a Weighted Average
      Quotation is obtained; and

(f)   if two or more Full Quotations or a Weighed Average Quotation are not obtained on or prior to
      the tenth Business Day following the applicable Valuation Date the Market Value shall be any
      Full Quotation obtained from a Quotation Dealer at the Valuation Time on such tenth Business
      Day, or if no Full Quotation is obtained, the weighted average of any firm quotations for the
      Reference Obligation obtained from Quotation Dealers at the Valuation Time on such tenth
      Business Day with respect to the aggregate portion of the Quotation Amount for which such
      quotations were obtained and a quotation deemed to be zero for the balance of the Quotation
      Amount for which firm quotations were not obtained on such day.

“Merger Event” means that at any time during the period from (and including) the Trade Date to (but
excluding) the Scheduled Termination Date the Guarantor or a Reference Entity consolidates or
amalgamates with, or merges into, or transfers all or substantially all of its assets to, a Reference
Entity or the Guarantor, as applicable, or the Guarantor and a Reference Entity become Affiliates.

“Minimum Quotation Amount” means the amount specified as such in the applicable Final Terms (or
its equivalent in the relevant Obligation Currency) or, if no amount is so specified, the lower of (a)
U.S.$1,000,000 (or its equivalent in the relevant Obligation Currency) and (b) the Quotation Amount.

“Modified Eligible Transferee” means any bank, financial institution or other entity which is regularly
engaged in an established for the purpose of making, purchasing or investing in loans, securities and
other financial assets.


                                              140
“Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation Date” means, with respect to a Deliverable Obligation,
the Limitation Date occurring on or immediately following the Scheduled Termination Date, provided
that, in circumstances where the Scheduled Termination Date is later than the 2.5-year Limitation
Date, at least one Enabling Obligation exists. Where “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and
Conditionally Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable Final
Terms and the Scheduled Termination Date is later than the 2.5-year Limitation Date and prior to the
5-year Limitation Date, a Restructured Bond or Loan will not constitute an Enabling Obligation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Scheduled Termination Date is either (i) on or prior to the 2.5-
year Limitation Date or (ii) later than the 2.5-year Limitation Date and on or prior to the 5-year
Limitation Date and no Enabling Obligation exists, the Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation
Date will be the 5-year Limitation Date in the case of a Restructured Bond or Loan only.

Subject to the foregoing, in the event that the Scheduled Termination Date is later than (A) the 2.5
year Limitation Date and no Enabling Obligation exists or (B) the 20-year Limitation Date, the
Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation Date will be the Scheduled Termination Date.

“Movement Option” means, where either “Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable
Obligation Applicable” or “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally
Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, and
where a No Auction Announcement Date has occurred pursuant to paragraph (b) of the definition of
No Auction Announcement Date, the option of the Issuer to apply to the Notes, for purposes of
settlement, the Parallel Auction Settlement Terms, if any, for purposes of which the Permissible
Deliverable Obligations are more limited than the Deliverable Obligations that could be specified in
any Calculation Agent Physical Settlement Notice (provided that if more than one such set of Parallel
Auction Settlement Terms are published, the Parallel Auction Settlement Terms specifying the
greatest number of such Permissible Deliverable Obligations shall apply). If no Notice to Exercise
Movement Option is delivered by the Issuer on or prior to the Movement Option Cut-off Date, the
Notes will be settled in accordance with the Fallback Settlement Method. If a Notice to Exercise
Movement Option is delivered by the Issuer on or prior to the Movement Option Cut-off Date, such
event will be notified to Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14.

“Movement Option Cut-off Date” means the date that is six Relevant City Business Days following
the Exercise Cut-off Date.

“Next Currency Fixing Time” means 4.00 p.m. (London time) on such London Business Day as the
Calculation Agent shall select falling no more than 5 London Business Days immediately preceding
the date on which the Notice of Physical Settlement or relevant Physical Settlement Amendment
Notice or relevant Partial Cash Settlement Notice, as applicable, is effective.

“No Auction Announcement Date” means, with respect to a Credit Event, the date on which ISDA
first publicly announces that (a) no Transaction Auction Settlement Terms and, if applicable, no
Parallel Auction Settlement Terms will be published, (b) following the occurrence of a Restructuring
where either “Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable Obligation Applicable” or
“Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally Transferable Obligation Applicable”
is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms only, no Transaction Auction Settlement Terms
will be published, but Parallel Auction Settlement Terms will be published or (c) the relevant Credit
Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved that no Auction will be held following a prior
public announcement by ISDA to the contrary.

“Notice Delivery Period” means the period from and including the Trade Date to and including the
date that is 14 calendar days after the Extension Date.

“Notice of Physical Settlement” has the meaning given to that term in Condition 24(d).

“Notice of Publicly Available Information” means a notice from the Calculation Agent to the Issuer
(which the Calculation Agent has the right but not the obligation to deliver) that cites Publicly
Available Information confirming the occurrence of the Credit Event or Potential



                                             141
Repudiation/Moratorium, as applicable, described in the Credit Event Notice or
Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Notice. In relation to a Repudiation/Moratorium Credit Event, the
Notice of Publicly Available Information must cite Publicly Available Information confirming the
occurrence of both clauses (i) and (ii) of the definition of Repudiation/Moratorium. The notice given
must contain a copy or description in reasonable detail, of the relevant Publicly Available Information.
If Notice of Publicly Available Information is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms
and a Credit Event Notice or Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Notice, as applicable, contains
Publicly Available Information, such Credit Event Notice or Repudiation/Moratorium Extension
Notice will also be deemed to be a Notice of Publicly Available Information. A Notice of Publicly
Available Information shall be subject to the requirements regarding notices in Condition 24(r).

“Notice to Exercise Movement Option” means, where (a) either “Restructuring Maturity Limitation
and Fully Transferable Obligation Applicable” or “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and
Conditionally Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable Final
Terms and (b) the Fallback Settlement Method would otherwise be applicable pursuant to the Auction
Settlement provisions, a notice from the Issuer to the Calculation Agent that (i) specifies the Parallel
Auction Settlement Terms applicable in accordance with the definition of Movement Option and (ii)
is effective on or prior to the Movement Option Cut-off Date.

“Obligation” means:

(a)   any obligation of a Reference Entity (either directly, as a provider of a Qualifying Affiliate
      Guarantee or, if All Guarantees is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, as
      provider of any Qualifying Guarantee) determined pursuant to the method described in
      “Method for Determining Obligations” below (but excluding any Excluded Obligation);

(b)   each Reference Obligation specified in the applicable Final Terms, unless specified as an
      Excluded Obligation; and

(c)   any Additional Obligation of a Reference Entity specified as such in the applicable Final
      Terms.

Method for Determining Obligations. For the purposes of paragraph (a) of this definition of
“Obligation”, the term “Obligation” may be defined as each obligation of each Reference Entity
described by the Obligation Category specified in the applicable Final Terms, and having each of the
Obligation Characteristics (if any) specified in the applicable Final Terms, in each case, as of the date
of the event which constitutes the Credit Event which is the subject of either the Credit Event Notice
or the notice to ISDA resulting in the occurrence of the Credit Event Resolution Request Date, as
applicable. The following terms shall have the following meanings:

(A)    “Obligation Category” means Payment, Borrowed Money, Reference Obligations Only, Bond,
       Loan, or Bond or Loan, only one of which shall be specified in the applicable Final Terms,
       where:

       (1)   “Payment” means any obligation (whether present or future, contingent or otherwise) for
             the payment or repayment of money, including, without limitation, Borrowed Money;

      (2)    “Borrowed Money” means any obligation (excluding an obligation under a revolving
             credit arrangement for which there are no outstanding unpaid drawings in respect of
             principal) for the payment or repayment of borrowed money (which term shall include,
             without limitation, deposits and reimbursement obligations arising from drawings
             pursuant to letters of credit);

      (3)    “Reference Obligations Only” means any obligation that is a Reference Obligation and
             no Obligation Characteristics shall be applicable to Reference Obligations Only;

      (4)    “Bond” means any obligation of a type included in the “Borrowed Money” Obligation
             Category that is in the form of, or represented by, a bond, note (other than notes



                                               142
            delivered pursuant to Loans), certificated debt security or other debt security and shall
            not include any other type of Borrowed Money;

      (5)   “Loan” means any obligation of a type included in the “Borrowed Money” Obligation
            Category that is documented by a term loan agreement, revolving loan agreement or
            other similar credit agreement and shall not include any other type of Borrowed Money;
            and

      (6)   “Bond or Loan” means any obligation that is either a Bond or a Loan.

(B)   “Obligation Characteristics” means any one or more of Not Subordinated, Specified Currency,
      Not Sovereign Lender, Not Domestic Currency, Not Domestic Law, Listed and Not Domestic
      Issuance specified in the applicable Final Terms, where:

      (1)   (a)    “Not Subordinated” means an obligation that is not Subordinated to (1) the most
                   senior Reference Obligation in priority of payment or, (2) if no Reference
                   Obligation is specified in the applicable Final Terms, any unsubordinated
                   Borrowed Money obligation of the Reference Entity provided that, if any of the
                   events set forth under paragraph (a) of the definition of Substitute Reference
                   Obligation has occurred with respect to all of the Reference Obligations or if the
                   final paragraph of the definition of Successor is applicable with respect to the
                   Reference Obligation (each, in each case, a “Prior Reference Obligation”) and no
                   Substitute Reference Obligation has been identified for any of the Prior Reference
                   Obligations at the time of the determination of whether an obligation satisfies the
                   “Not Subordinated” Obligation Characteristic or Deliverable Obligation
                   Characteristic, as applicable, “Not Subordinated” shall mean an obligation that
                   would not have been Subordinated to the most senior such Prior Reference
                   Obligation in priority of payment. For purposes of determining whether an
                   obligation satisfies the “Not Subordinated” Obligation Characteristic or
                   Deliverable Obligation Characteristic, the ranking in priority of payment of each
                   Reference Obligation or each prior Reference Obligation, as applicable, shall be
                   determined as of the date as of which the relevant Reference Obligation or Prior
                   Reference Obligation, as applicable, was issued or incurred and shall not reflect
                   any change to such ranking in priority of payment after such date;

            (b)   “Subordination” means, with respect to an obligation (the “Subordinated
                  Obligation”) and another obligation of the Reference Entity to which such
                  obligation is being compared (the “Senior Obligation”), a contractual, trust or
                  other similar arrangement providing that (i) upon the liquidation, dissolution,
                  reorganisation or winding up of the Reference Entity, claims of the holders of the
                  Senior Obligation will be satisfied prior to the claims of the holders of the
                  Subordinated Obligation or (ii) the holders of the Subordinated Obligation will
                  not be entitled to receive or retain payments in respect of their claims against the
                  Reference Entity at any time that the Reference Entity is in payment arrears or is
                  otherwise in default under the Senior Obligation. “Subordinated” will be
                  construed accordingly. For purposes of determining whether Subordination exists
                  or whether an obligation is Subordinated with respect to another obligation to
                  which it is being compared, the existence of preferred creditors arising by
                  operation of law or of collateral, credit support or other credit enhancement
                  arrangements shall not be taken into account, except that, notwithstanding the
                  foregoing, priorities arising by operation of law shall be taken into account where
                  the Reference Entity is a Sovereign;

      (2)   “Specified Currency” means an obligation that is payable in the currency or currencies
            specified as such in the applicable Final Terms (or, if Specified Currency is specified in
            the applicable Final Terms and no currency is so specified, any of the lawful currencies
            of Canada, Japan, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States of America


                                            143
             and the euro and any successor currency to any of the aforementioned currencies, which
             currencies shall be referred to collectively in the applicable Final Terms as the “Standard
             Specified Currencies”);

      (3)    “Not Sovereign Lender” means any obligation that is not primarily owed to a Sovereign
             or Supranational Organisation, including, without limitation, obligations generally
             referred to as “Paris Club debt”;

      (4)    “Not Domestic Currency” means any obligation that is payable in any currency other
             than the Domestic Currency;

      (5)    “Not Domestic Law” means any obligation that is not governed by the laws of (a) the
             relevant Reference Entity, if such Reference Entity is a Sovereign, or (b) the jurisdiction
             of organisation of the relevant Reference Entity, if such Reference Entity is not a
             Sovereign;

      (6)    “Listed” means an obligation that is quoted, listed or ordinarily purchased and sold on
             an exchange; and

      (7)    “Not Domestic Issuance” means any obligation other than an obligation that was, at the
             time the relevant obligation was issued (or reissued, as the case may be) or incurred,
             intended to be offered for sale primarily in the domestic market of the relevant Reference
             Entity. Any obligation that is registered or qualified for sale outside the domestic market
             of the relevant Reference Entity (regardless of whether such obligation is also registered
             or qualified for sale within the domestic market of the relevant Reference Entity) shall
             be deemed not to be intended for sale primarily in the domestic market of the Reference
             Entity.

      (8)    “Obligation Acceleration” means one or more Obligations in an aggregate amount of not
             less than the Default Requirement have become due and payable before they would
             otherwise have been due and payable as a result of, or on the basis of, the occurrence of
             a default, event or default or other similar condition or event (however described), other
             than a failure to make any required payment, in respect of a Reference Entity under one
             or more Obligations.

“Obligation Currency” means the currency or currencies in which the Obligation is denominated.

“Obligation Default” means one or more Obligations in an aggregate amount of not less than the
Default Requirement have become capable of being declared due and payable before they would
otherwise have been due and payable as a result of, or on the basis of, the occurrence of a default,
event of default, or other similar condition or event (however described), other than a failure to make
any required payment, in respect of a Reference Entity under one or more Obligations.

“Outstanding Principal Balance” means, subject as provided in sub-paragraph (4)(vi) of paragraph (B)
(Interpretation of Provisions) in the definition of Deliverable Obligation:

(a)   with respect to any Accreting Obligation, the Accreted Amount thereof; and

(b)   with respect to any other obligation, the outstanding principal balance of such obligation,

Provided That with respect to any Exchangeable Obligation that is not an Accreting Obligation,
“Outstanding Principal Balance” shall exclude any amount that may be payable under the terms of
such obligation in respect of the value of the Equity Securities for which such obligation is
exchangeable.

“Parallel Auction” means “Auction” as such term shall be defined in the relevant Parallel Auction
Settlement Terms.




                                              144
“Parallel Auction Cancellation Date” means “Auction Cancellation Date” as such term shall be
defined in the relevant Parallel Auction Settlement Terms.

“Parallel Auction Final Price Determination Date” means “Auction Final Price Determination Date”
as such term shall be defined in the relevant Parallel Auction Settlement Terms.

“Parallel Auction Settlement Date” means “Auction Settlement Date” as such term shall be defined in
the relevant Parallel Auction Settlement Terms.

“Parallel Auction Settlement Terms” means, following the occurrence of a Restructuring where either
“Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable Obligation Applicable” or “Modified
Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified
as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, any Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement Terms
published by ISDA with respect to such Restructuring in accordance with the Rules, and for which (i)
the Deliverable Obligation Terms are the same as the Reference Transaction and (ii) the Reference
Transaction would not be an Auction Covered Transaction.

“Payment Requirement” means the amount specified as such in the applicable Final Terms or its
equivalent in the relevant Obligation Currency or, if a Payment Requirement is not specified in the
applicable Final Terms, U.S.$1,000,000, or its equivalent as calculated by the Calculation Agent in the
relevant Obligation Currency, in either case, as of the occurrence of the relevant Failure to Pay or
Potential Failure to Pay, as applicable.

“Permissible Deliverable Obligations” has the meaning set forth in the relevant Credit Derivatives
Auction Settlement Terms, being either all or the portion of the Deliverable Obligations included in
the Final List pursuant to the Deliverable Obligation Terms applicable to the relevant Auction.

“Permitted Currency” means (i) the legal tender of any Group of 7 country (or any country that
becomes a member of the Group of 7 if such Group of 7 expands its membership), or (ii) the legal
tender of any country which, as of the date of such change, is a member of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development and has a local currency long term debt rating of either
AAA or higher assigned to it by Standard & Poor’s, a division of The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
or any successor to the rating business thereof, Aaa or higher assigned to it by Moody’s Investors
Service, Inc. or any successor to the rating business thereof or AAA or higher assigned to it by Fitch
Ratings or any successor to the rating business thereof.

“Physical Settlement Amendment Notice” has the meaning given to that term in Condition 24(d).

“Physical Settlement Period” means, subject to Condition 24(k), the number of Business Days
specified as such in the applicable Final Terms or, if a number of Business Days is not so specified,
then, with respect to a Deliverable Obligation comprising the Asset Amount, the longest number of
Business Days for settlement in accordance with then current market practice of such Deliverable
Obligation, as determined by the Calculation Agent.

“Potential Credit Event” means a Potential Failure to Pay (if Failure to Pay is an applicable Credit
Event in respect of the Reference Entity), a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium (if
Repudiation/Moratorium is an applicable Credit Event in respect of the Reference Entity) or if a
Credit Event Resolution Request Date has occurred and the relevant Credit Derivatives
Determinations Committee has not made its determination, such event will be deemed to be a
Potential Credit Event. A Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee and the Calculation Agent
may each determine whether a Potential Failure to Pay or a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium has
occurred.

“Potential Failure to Pay” means the failure by a Reference Entity to make, when and where due, any
payments in an aggregate amount of not less than the Payment Requirement under one or more
Obligations, without regard to any grace period or any conditions precedent to the commencement of
any grace period applicable to such Obligations, in accordance with the terms of such Obligations at
the time of such failure.


                                              145
“Potential Repudiation/Moratorium” means the occurrence of an event described in paragraph (i) of
the definition of Repudiation/Moratorium.

“Public Source” means each source of Publicly Available Information specified as such in the
applicable Final Terms (or if a source is not specified in the applicable Final Terms, each of
Bloomberg Service, Dow Jones Telerate Service, Reuter Monitor Money Rates Services, Dow Jones
News Wire, Wall Street Journal, New York Times, Nihon Keizai Shinbun, Asahi Shinbun, Yomiuri
Shinbun, Financial Times, La Tribune, Les Echos and The Australian Financial Review (and successor
publications), the main source(s) of business news in the country in which the Reference Entity is
organised and any other internationally recognised published or electronically displayed news
sources).

“Publicly Available Information” means:

(a)   information that reasonably confirms any of the facts relevant to the determination that the
      Credit Event or a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium, as applicable, described in a Credit Event
      Notice or Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Notice has occurred and which:

      (i)     has been published in or not less than the Specified Number of Public Sources,
              regardless of whether the reader or user thereof pays a fee to obtain such information
              provided that, if either the Calculation Agent or the Issuer, the Guarantor or any of their
              respective Affiliates is cited as the sole source of such information, then such
              information shall not be deemed to be Publicly Available Information unless either the
              Calculation Agent or the Issuer, the Guarantor or any of their Affiliates is acting in its
              capacity as trustee, fiscal agent, administrative agent, clearing agent, paying agent,
              facility agent or agent bank for an Obligation; or

      (ii)    is information received from or published by (A) a Reference Entity or, as the case may
              be, a Sovereign Agency in respect of a Reference Entity which is a Sovereign or (B) a
              trustee, fiscal agent, administrative agent, clearing agent, paying agent, facility agent or
              agent bank for an Obligation; or

      (iii)   is information contained in any petition or filing instituting a proceeding described in
              paragraph (d) of the definition of Bankruptcy against or by a Reference Entity; or

      (iv)    is information contained in any order, decree, notice or filing, however described, of or
              filed with a court, tribunal, exchange, regulatory authority or similar administrative,
              regulatory or judicial body.

(b)   In the event that the Calculation Agent is (i) the sole source of information in its capacity as
      trustee, fiscal agent, administrative agent, clearing agent, paying agent, facility agent or agent
      bank for the Obligation with respect to which a Credit Event has occurred and (ii) a holder of
      such Obligation, the Calculation Agent shall be required to deliver to the Issuer a certificate
      signed by a Managing Director (or other substantially equivalent title) of the Calculation Agent,
      which shall certify the occurrence of a Credit Event with respect to such Obligation.

(c)   In relation to any information of the type described in paragraphs (a) (ii), (iii) and (iv) above,
      the Calculation Agent may assume that such information has been disclosed to it without
      violating any law, agreement or understanding regarding the confidentiality of such
      information and that the entity disclosing such information has not taken any action or entered
      into any agreement or understanding with the Reference Entity or any Affiliate of the Reference
      Entity that would be breached by, or would prevent, the disclosure of such information to the
      party receiving such information.

(d)   Publicly Available Information need not state:

      (i)     in relation to the definition of “Downstream Affiliate”, the percentage of Voting Shares
              owned, directly or indirectly, by the Reference Entity; and



                                               146
      (ii)    that such occurrence:

              (A)   has met the Payment Requirement or Default Requirement; is the result of
                    exceeding any applicable Grace Period; or

              (B)   has met the subjective criteria specified in certain Credit Events.

“Qualifying Affiliate Guarantee” means a Qualifying Guarantee provided by a Reference Entity in
respect of an Underlying Obligation of a Downstream Affiliate of that Reference Entity.

“Qualifying Guarantee” means an arrangement evidenced by a written instrument pursuant to which
a Reference Entity irrevocably agrees (by guarantee of payment or equivalent legal arrangement) to
pay all amounts due under an obligation (the “Underlying Obligation”) for which another party is the
obligor (the “Underlying Obligor”) and that is not at the time of the Credit Event Subordinated to any
unsubordinated Borrowed Money obligation of the Underlying Obligor (with references in the
definition of Subordination to the Reference Entity deemed to refer to the Underlying Obligor).
Qualifying Guarantees shall exclude any arrangement structured as a surety bond, financial guarantee
insurance policy, letter of credit or equivalent legal arrangement. The benefit of a Qualifying
Guarantee must be capable of being Delivered together with the Delivery of the Underlying
Obligation.

“Qualifying Participation Seller” means any participation seller that meets the requirements specified
in the applicable Final Terms. If no such requirements are specified, there shall be no Qualifying
Participation Seller.

“Quotation” means each Full Quotation and the Weighted Average Quotation obtained and expressed
as a percentage with respect to a Valuation Date in the manner that follows:

(a)   The Calculation Agent shall attempt to obtain Full Quotations with respect to each Valuation
      Date from five or more Quotation Dealers. If the Calculation Agent is unable to obtain two or
      more such Full Quotations on the same Business Day within three Business Days of a Valuation
      Date, then on the next following Business Day (and, if necessary, on each Business Day
      thereafter until the tenth Business Day following the relevant Valuation Date) the Calculation
      Agent shall attempt to obtain Full Quotations from five or more Quotation Dealers and, if two
      or more Full Quotations are not available, a Weighted Average Quotation. If the Calculation
      Agent is unable to obtain two or more Full Quotations or a Weighted Average Quotation on the
      same Business Day on or prior to the tenth Business Day following the applicable Valuation
      Date the Quotations shall be deemed to be any Full Quotation obtained from a Quotation
      Dealer at the Valuation Time on such tenth Business Day, or if no Full Quotation is obtained,
      the weighted average of any firm quotations for the Reference Obligation obtained from
      Quotation Dealers at the Valuation Time on such tenth Business Day with respect to the
      aggregate portion of the Quotation Amount for which such quotations were obtained and a
      quotation deemed to be zero for the balance of the Quotation Amount for which firm quotations
      were not obtained on such day.

(b)   (i)     If “Include Accrued Interest” is specified in the applicable Final Terms in respect of
              Quotations, such Quotations shall include accrued but unpaid interest;

      (ii)    if “Exclude Accrued Interest” is specified in the applicable Final Terms in respect of
              Quotations, such Quotations shall not include accrued but unpaid interest; and

      (iii)   if neither “Include Accrued Interest” nor “Exclude Accrued Interest” is specified in the
              applicable Final Terms in respect of Quotations, the Calculation Agent shall determine
              based on then current market practice in the market of the Reference Obligation,
              whether such Quotations shall include or exclude accrued but unpaid interest. All
              Quotations shall be obtained in accordance with this specification or determination.




                                             147
(c)   If any Quotation obtained with respect to an Accreting Obligation is expressed as a percentage
      of the amount payable in respect of such obligation at maturity, such Quotation will instead be
      expressed as a percentage of the Outstanding Principal Balance for the purposes of determining
      the Final Price.

“Quotation Amount” means the amount specified as such in the applicable Final Terms (which may
be specified by reference to an amount in a currency or by reference to a Representative Amount) or,
if no amount is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Aggregate Nominal Amount (or, in either
case, its equivalent in the relevant Obligation Currency converted by the Calculation Agent by
reference to exchange rates in effect at the time that the relevant Quotation is being obtained).

“Quotation Dealer” means a dealer in obligations of the type of Obligation(s) for which Quotations
are to be obtained including each Quotation Dealer specified in the applicable Final Terms. If no
Quotation Dealers are specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Calculation Agent shall select the
Quotation Dealers. Upon a Quotation Dealer no longer being in existence (with no successors), or not
being an active dealer in the obligations of the type for which Quotations are to be obtained, the
Calculation Agent may substitute any other Quotation Dealer(s) for such Quotation Dealer(s).

“Quotation Method” means the applicable Quotation Method specified in the applicable Final Terms
by reference to one of the following terms:

(a)   “Bid” means that only bid quotations shall be requested from Quotation Dealers;

(b)   “Offer” means that only offer quotations shall be requested from Quotation Dealers; or

(c)   “Mid-market” means that bid and offer quotations shall be requested from Quotation Dealers
      and shall be averaged for purposes of determining a relevant Quotation Dealer’s quotation.

If a Quotation Method is not specified in the applicable Final Terms, Bid shall apply.

“Reference Entity” means the entity or entities specified as such in the applicable Final Terms. Any
Successor to a Reference Entity either (a) identified pursuant to the definition of “Successor” in this
Condition 24(m) on or following the Trade Date or (b) in respect of which ISDA publicly announces
on or following the Trade Date that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has
Resolved, in respect of a Succession Event Resolution Request Date, a Successor in accordance with
the Rules shall, in each case, be the Reference Entity for the purposes of the relevant Series.

“Reference Obligation” means each obligation specified or of a type described as such in the
applicable Final Terms (if any are so specified or described) and any Substitute Reference Obligation.

“Reference Transaction” means a hypothetical credit derivative transaction:

(a)   for which the Deliverable Obligation Terms and the Reference Obligation are (i) the same as
      in respect of the Notes (if such Deliverable Obligation Terms and Reference Obligation are
      specified in the applicable Final Terms) or (ii) if and to the extent the Deliverable Obligation
      Terms and/or the Reference Obligation are not specified, the Deliverable Obligation Terms and
      Reference Obligation determined by the Calculation Agent to be appropriate in respect of a
      credit derivative transaction linked to the relevant Reference Entity;

(b)   with a scheduled termination date matching the Scheduled Termination Date of the Notes; and

(c)   otherwise having such other characteristics as the Calculation Agent may determine
      appropriate by reference to, without limitation, the Issuer’s hedging arrangements and/or any
      credit derivative elections made in relation to the Notes.

“Relevant City Business Day” has the meaning set out in the Rules.

“Relevant Obligations” means the Obligations constituting Bonds and Loans of the Reference Entity
outstanding immediately prior to the effective date of the Succession Event, excluding any debt
obligations outstanding between the Reference Entity and any of its Affiliates, as determined by the


                                              148
Calculation Agent. The Calculation Agent will determine the entity which succeeds to such Relevant
Obligations on the basis of the Best Available Information. If the date on which the Best Available
Information becomes available or is filed precedes the legally effective date of the relevant Succession
Event, any assumptions as to the allocation of obligations between or among entities contained in the
Best Available Information will be deemed to have been fulfilled as of the legally effective date of the
Succession Event, whether or not this is in fact the case.

“Relevant Time” means Greenwich Mean Time (or, if the Transaction Type of the relevant Reference
Entity is Japan Corporate or Japan Sovereign (as such terms are defined in the 2005 Matrix
Supplement) Tokyo time.

“Replaced Deliverable Obligation Outstanding Amount” has the meaning given to that term in
Condition 24(d).

“Replacement Deliverable Obligation” has the meaning given to that term in Condition 24(d).

“Representative Amount” means an amount that is representative for a single transaction in the
relevant market and at the relevant time, such amount to be determined by the Calculation Agent.

“Repudiation/Moratorium” means the occurrence of both of the following events:

(i)    an authorised officer of a Reference Entity or a Governmental Authority:

       (x)   disaffirms, disclaims, repudiates or rejects, in whole or in part, or challenges the validity
             of, one or more Obligations in an aggregate amount of not less than the Default
             Requirement; or

       (y)   declares or imposes a moratorium, standstill, roll-over or deferral, whether de facto or
             de jure, with respect to one or more Obligations in an aggregate amount of not less than
             the Default Requirement; and

(ii)   a Failure to Pay, determined without regard to the Payment Requirement, or a Restructuring,
       determined without regard to the Default Requirement, with respect to any such Obligation
       occurs on or prior to the Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date.

“Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date” means, if a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium occurs on
or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time) (i) if the
Obligations to which such Potential Repudiation/Moratorium relates include Bonds, the date that is
the later of (A) the date that is 60 days after the date of such Potential Repudiation/Moratorium and
(B) the first payment date under any such Bond after the date of such Potential
Repudiation/Moratorium (or, if later, the expiration date of any applicable Grace Period in respect of
such payment date) and (ii) if the Obligations to which such Potential Repudiation/Moratorium relates
do not include Bonds, the date that is 60 days after the date of such Potential Repudiation/Moratorium
provided that, in either case, the Repudiation/Moratorium Evaluation Date shall occur no later than
the Scheduled Termination Date unless the Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Condition is satisfied.

“Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Condition” will be satisfied:

(i)    if ISDA publicly announces, pursuant to a valid request that was delivered in accordance with
       the Rules and effectively received on or prior to the date that is 14 calendar days after the
       Scheduled Termination Date, that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee
       has Resolved that an event that constitutes a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium has occurred
       with respect to an Obligation of the relevant Reference Entity and that such event occurred on
       or prior to the Scheduled Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time); or

(ii)   otherwise, by the delivery by the Calculation Agent to the Issuer of a Repudiation/Moratorium
       Extension Notice and, if Notice of Publicly Available Information is specified as applicable in
       the applicable Final Terms, a Notice of Publicly Available Information that are each effective
       on or prior to the date that is 14 calendar days after the Scheduled Termination Date.


                                              149
In all cases, the Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Condition will be deemed not to have been
satisfied, or capable of being satisfied, if, or to the extent that, ISDA publicly announces, pursuant to
a valid request that was delivered in accordance with the Rules and effectively received on or prior to
the date that is 14 calendar days after the Scheduled Termination Date, that the relevant Credit
Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved that either (A) an event does not constitutes a
Potential Repudiation/Moratorium with respect to an Obligation of the relevant Reference Entity or
(B) an event that constitutes a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium has occurred with respect to an
Obligation of the relevant Reference Entity but that such event occurred after the Scheduled
Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time).

As at the date hereof, the Rules provide that each “Eligible Market Participant” (being each party
which is a party to a credit derivatives transaction that have, or are deemed to have incorporated the
March 2009 Supplement or the July 2009 Supplement in a confirmation) is permitted to deliver such
a notice to ISDA pursuant to the Rules.

“Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Notice” means a notice from the Calculation Agent to the Issuer
(which the Calculation Agent has the right but not the obligation to deliver) that describes a Potential
Repudiation/Moratorium that occurred on or after the Trade Date and on or prior to the Scheduled
Termination Date (determined by reference to the Relevant Time). A Repudiation/Moratorium
Extension Notice must contain a description in reasonable detail of the facts relevant to the
determination that a Potential Repudiation/Moratorium has occurred and indicate the date of the
occurrence. The Potential Repudiation/Moratorium that is the subject of the Repudiation/Moratorium
Extension Notice need not be continuing on the date the Repudiation/Moratorium Extension Notice
is effective.

“Resolve” has the meaning set out in the Rules, and “Resolved” and “Resolves” shall be interpreted
accordingly.

“Restructured Bond or Loan” means an Obligation which is a Bond or Loan and in respect of which
the relevant Restructuring has occurred.

“Restructuring” means, with respect to one or more Obligations and in relation to an aggregate
amount of not less than the Default Requirement, any one or more of the following events occurs in
a form that binds all holders of such Obligation, is agreed between a Reference Entity or a
Governmental Authority and a sufficient number of holders of such Obligation to bind all the holders
of the Obligation or is announced (or otherwise decreed) by a Reference Entity or a Governmental
Authority in a form that binds all holders of such Obligation, and such event is not expressly provided
for under the terms of such Obligation in effect as of the later of (i) the Credit Event Backstop Date
applicable to the relevant Notes and (ii) the date as of which such Obligation is issued or incurred:

(i)     a reduction in the rate or amount of interest payable or the amount of scheduled interest
        accruals;

(ii)    a reduction in the amount of principal or premium payable at maturity or at scheduled
        redemption dates;

(iii)   a postponement or other deferral of a date or dates for either (i) the payment or accrual of
        interest or (ii) the payment of principal or premium;

(iv)    a change in the ranking in priority of payment of any Obligation, causing the Subordination of
        such Obligation to any other Obligation; or

(v)     any change in the currency or composition of any payment of interest or principal to any
        currency which is not a Permitted Currency.




                                               150
Notwithstanding the above provisions, none of the following shall constitute a Restructuring:

(a)   the payment in euro of interest or principal in relation to an Obligation denominated in a
      currency of a Member State of the European Union that adopts or has adopted the single
      currency in accordance with the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, as amended;

(b)   the occurrence of, agreement to or announcement of any of the events described in (i) to (v)
      above due to an administrative adjustment, accounting adjustment or tax adjustment or other
      technical adjustment occurring in the ordinary course of business; and

(c)   the occurrence of, agreement to or announcement of any of the events described in (i) to (v)
      above in circumstances where such event does not directly or indirectly result from a
      deterioration in the creditworthiness or financial condition of the Reference Entity.

For purposes of the definition of Restructuring and Condition 24(o), the term Obligation shall be
deemed to include Underlying Obligations for which the Reference Entity is acting as provider of a
Qualifying Affiliate Guarantee or, if All Guarantees is specified as applicable in the applicable Final
Terms, as provider of any Qualifying Guarantee. In the case of a Qualifying Guarantee and an
Underlying Obligation, references to the Reference Entity in the definition of Restructuring and the
definition of Subordination shall be deemed to refer to the Underlying Obligor and the reference to
the Reference Entity in the second paragraph of this definition of Restructuring shall continue to refer
to the Reference Entity.

“Restructuring Date” means the date on which a Restructuring is legally effective in accordance with
the terms of the documentation governing such Restructuring.

“Restructuring Maturity Limitation Date” means with respect to a Deliverable Obligation, the
Limitation Date occurring on or immediately following the Scheduled Termination Date, provided
that, in circumstances where the Scheduled Termination Date is later than the 2.5-year Limitation
Date, at least one Enabling Obligation exists. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the final maturity date
of the Restructured Bond or Loan with the latest final maturity date of any Restructured Bond or Loan
occurs prior to the 2.5-year Limitation Date (such Restructured Bond or Loan, a “Latest Maturity
Restructured Bond or Loan”) and the Scheduled Termination Date occurs prior to the final maturity
date of such Latest Maturity Restructured Bond or Loan, then the Restructuring Maturity Limitation
Date will be the final maturity date of such Latest Maturity Restructured Bond or Loan.

In the event that the Scheduled Termination Date is later than (i)(A) the final maturity date of the
Latest Maturity Restructured Bond or Loan, if any, or (B) the 2.5-year Limitation Date, and, in either
case, no Enabling Obligation exists or (ii) the 20-year Limitation Date, the Restructuring Maturity
Limitation Date will be the Scheduled Termination Date.

“Revised Currency Rate” means, with respect to a Replacement Deliverable Obligation specified in a
Physical Settlement Amendment Notice, the rate of conversion between the currency in which the
Replaced Deliverable Obligation Outstanding Amount is denominated and the currency in which the
Outstanding Principal Balance or Due and Payable Amount of such Replacement Deliverable
Obligation is denominated that is determined either (a) by reference to the Currency Rate Source as
at the Next Currency Fixing Time or (b) if such rate is not available at such time, by the Calculation
Agent.

“Rules” has the meaning given to that term in the definition of “Credit Derivatives Determinations
Committee” above.

“Settlement Currency” means the currency specified as such in the applicable Final Terms, or if no
currency is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Specified Currency of the Notes.

“Settlement Date” means the last day of the longest Physical Settlement Period following the
satisfaction of Conditions to Settlement (the “Scheduled Settlement Date”) provided that if a Hedge
Disruption Event has occurred and is continuing on the second Business Day immediately preceding



                                              151
the Scheduled Settlement Date, the Settlement Date shall be the earlier of (i) the second Business Day
following the date on which no Hedge Disruption Event subsists and (ii) the day falling 60 Business
Days following the Scheduled Settlement Date.

“Settlement Method” means, if (a) Auction Settlement is specified as the applicable Settlement
Method in the applicable Final Terms, Auction Settlement, (b) Cash Settlement is specified as the
applicable Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms, Cash Settlement, or (c) Physical Delivery
is specified as the applicable Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms, Physical Delivery.

“Sovereign” means any state, political subdivision or government, or any agency, instrumentality,
ministry, department or other authority (including without limiting the foregoing, the central bank)
thereof.

“Sovereign Agency” means any agency, instrumentality, ministry, department or other authority
(including, without limiting the foregoing, the central bank) of a Sovereign.

“Sovereign Restructured Deliverable Obligation” means an Obligation of a Sovereign Reference
Entity (a) in respect of which a Restructuring that is the subject of the relevant Credit Event Notice
has occurred and (b) described by the Deliverable Obligation Category specified in the applicable
Final Terms, and, subject to paragraph (3) of “(B) Interpretation of Provisions” in the definition of
“Deliverable Obligation”, having each of the Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, if any, specified
in the applicable Final Terms, in each case, immediately preceding the date on which such
Restructuring is legally effective in accordance with the terms of the documentation governing such
Restructuring without regard to whether the Obligation would satisfy such Deliverable Obligation
Category or Deliverable Obligation Characteristics after such Restructuring.

“Specified Number” means the number of Public Source(s) specified in the applicable Final Terms,
or if no number is specified in the applicable Final Terms, two.

“Substitute Reference Obligation” means one or more obligations of a Reference Entity (either
directly or as provider of a Qualifying Affiliate Guarantee or, if All Guarantees is specified as
applicable in the applicable Final Terms, as provider of any Qualifying Guarantee) that will replace
one or more Reference Obligations in respect of such Reference Entity, identified by the Calculation
Agent in accordance with the following procedures:

(a)   In the event that:

      (i)    a Reference Obligation in respect of such Reference Entity is redeemed in whole; or

      (ii)   in the opinion of the Calculation Agent (A) the aggregate amounts due under any
             Reference Obligation in respect of such Reference Entity have been materially reduced
             by redemption or otherwise (other than due to any scheduled redemption, amortisation
             or prepayments), (B) any Reference Obligation in respect of such Reference Entity is an
             Underlying Obligation with a Qualifying Guarantee of a Reference Entity and, other
             than due to the existence or occurrence of a Credit Event, the Qualifying Guarantee is
             no longer a valid and binding obligation of such Reference Entity enforceable in
             accordance with its terms or (C) for any other reason, other than due to the existence or
             occurrence of a Credit Event, any Reference Obligation in respect of a Reference Entity
             is no longer an obligation of such Reference Entity,

      the Calculation Agent shall identify one or more Obligations to replace such Reference
      Obligation in respect of a Reference Entity.

(b)   Any Substitute Reference Obligation or Substitute Reference Obligations shall be an
      Obligation that (i) ranks pari passu in priority of payment with the ranking in priority of
      payment of each of the Substitute Reference Obligation and such Reference Obligation (with
      the ranking in priority of payment of such Reference Obligation being determined as of the date
      as of which such Reference Obligation was issued or incurred and not reflecting any change to



                                             152
       such ranking in priority of payment after such date), (ii) preserves the economic equivalent, as
       closely as practicable as determined by the Calculation Agent of the delivery and payment
       obligations of the Issuer and (iii) is an obligation of the relevant Reference Entity (either
       directly or as provider of a Qualifying Affiliate Guarantee or, if All Guarantees is specified as
       applicable in the applicable Final Terms, as provider of any Qualifying Guarantee). The
       Substitute Reference Obligation or Substitute Reference Obligations identified by the
       Calculation Agent shall, without further action, replace such Reference Obligation or
       Reference Obligations.

(c)    If more than one specific Reference Obligation is identified as a Reference Obligation in
       respect of a Reference Entity in relation to a Series, any of the events set forth in paragraph (a)
       above has occurred with respect to one or more but not all such Reference Obligations, and the
       Calculation Agent determines that no Substitute Reference Obligation is available for one or
       more of such Reference Obligations, each such Reference Obligation for which no Substitute
       Reference Obligation is available shall cease to be a Reference Obligation.

(d)    If more than one specific Reference Obligation is identified as a Reference Obligation in
       respect of a Reference Entity in relation to a Series, any of the events set forth in paragraph (a)
       above has occurred with respect to all such Reference Obligations, and the Calculation Agent
       determines that at least one Substitute Reference Obligation is available for any such Reference
       Obligation, then each such Reference Obligation shall be replaced by a Substitute Reference
       Obligation and each Reference Obligation for which no Substitute Reference Obligation is
       available will cease to be a Reference Obligation.

(e)    If:

       (i)    more than one specific Reference Obligation is identified as a Reference Obligation in
              respect of a Reference Entity in relation to a Series, any of the events set forth in
              paragraph (a) above has occurred with respect to all such Reference Obligations and the
              Calculation Agent determines that no Substitute Reference Obligation is available for
              any of such Reference Obligations; or

       (ii)   only one specific Reference Obligation is identified as a Reference Obligation in respect
              of a Reference Entity in relation to a Series, any of the events set forth in paragraph (a)
              above has occurred with respect to such Reference Obligation and the Calculation Agent
              determines that no Substitute Reference Obligation is available for that Reference
              Obligation,

       then the Calculation Agent shall continue to attempt to identify a Substitute Reference
       Obligation until the Extension Date. If (A) either (i) Cash Settlement is specified as the
       Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms (or is applicable pursuant to the Fallback
       Settlement Method) and the Credit Event Redemption Amount is determined by reference to a
       Reference Obligation or (ii) either Auction Settlement or Physical Delivery is specified as the
       Settlement Method in the applicable Final Terms (or, in the case of Physical Delivery, is
       applicable pursuant to the Fallback Settlement Method) and, in each case, the Reference
       Obligation is the only Deliverable Obligation and (B) on or prior to the Extension Date
       (determined by reference to the Relevant Time), a Substitute Reference Obligation has not been
       identified, the Issuer may give notice to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 and
       redeem all but not some only of the Notes and pay in respect of each nominal amount of the
       Notes equal to the Calculation Amount the Early Redemption Amount.

(f)    For the purposes of identification of a Reference Obligation, any change in the Reference
       Obligation’s CUSIP or ISIN number or other similar identifier will not, in and of itself, convert
       such Reference Obligation into a different Obligation.

“Succession Event” means (i) with respect to a Reference Entity that is not a Sovereign, an event such
as a merger, de-merger, consolidation, amalgamation, transfer of assets or liabilities, spin¬off or other



                                               153
similar event in which one entity succeeds to the obligations of another entity, whether by operation
of law or pursuant to any agreement or (ii) with respect to a Reference Entity that is a Sovereign, an
event such as an annexation, unification, secession, partition, dissolution, consolidation, reconstitution
or other event that results in any direct or indirect successor(s) to such Reference Entity.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, “Succession Event” shall not include an event (A) in which the
holders of obligations of the Reference Entity exchange such obligations for the obligations of another
entity, unless such exchange occurs in connection with a merger, demerger, consolidation,
amalgamation, transfer of assets or liabilities, spin-off or other similar event or (B) with respect to
which the legally effective date (or, in the case of a Reference Entity that is a Sovereign, the date of
occurrence) has occurred prior to the Succession Event Backstop Date (determined by reference to the
Relevant Time) applicable to the relevant Series.

“Succession Event Backstop Date” means:

(i)    for purposes of any event that constitutes a Succession Event, as determined by DC Resolution,
       the date that is 90 calendar days prior to the Succession Event Resolution Request Date
       (determined by reference to the Relevant Time); or

(ii)   otherwise, the date that is 90 calendar days prior to the earlier of:

       (A)    the date on which the Succession Event Notice is effective; and

       (B)    in circumstances where (I) the conditions to convening a Credit Derivatives
              Determinations Committee to Resolve the matters described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of
              the definition of Succession Event Resolution Request Date are satisfied in accordance
              with the Rules, (II) the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has
              Resolved not to determine such matters and (III) the Succession Event Notice is
              delivered by the Calculation Agent to the Issuer not more than 14 calendar days after the
              day on which ISDA publicly announces that the relevant Credit Derivatives
              Determinations Committee has Resolved not to determine such matters, the Succession
              Event Resolution Request Date.

The Succession Event Backstop Date shall not be subject to adjustment in accordance with any
Business Day Convention unless specified in the applicable Final Terms that the Succession Event
Backstop Date will be adjusted in accordance with a specified Business Day Convention.

“Succession Event Notice” means a notice from the Calculation Agent to the Issuer that describes a
Succession Event that occurred on or after the Succession Event Backstop Date (determined by
reference to the Relevant Time).

A Succession Event Notice must contain a description in reasonable detail of the facts relevant to the
determination, of (i) whether a Succession Event has occurred and (ii) if relevant, the identity of any
Successor(s).

“Succession Event Resolution Request Date” means, with respect to a notice to ISDA, delivered in
accordance with the Rules, requesting that a Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee be
convened to Resolve:

(a)    whether an event that constitutes a Succession Event for purposes of a Series has occurred with
       respect to the relevant Reference Entity; and

(b)    if the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee Resolves that such event has
       occurred, (A) with respect to a Reference Entity that is not a Sovereign, the legally effective
       date of such event or (B) with respect to a Reference Entity that is a Sovereign, the date of the
       occurrence of such event,

the date, as publicly announced by ISDA, that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations
Committee Resolves to be the date on which such notice is effective.



                                               154
As at the date hereof, the Rules provide that each “Eligible Market Participant” (being each party
which is a party to a credit derivatives transaction that have, or are deemed to have incorporated the
March 2009 Supplement or the July 2009 Supplement in a confirmation) is permitted to deliver such
a notice to ISDA pursuant to the Rules.

“Successor” means:

(a)   in relation to a Reference Entity that is not a Sovereign, the entity or entities, if any, determined
      as set forth below:

      (i)     if one entity directly or indirectly succeeds to 75 per cent. or more of the Relevant
              Obligations of the Reference Entity by way of a Succession Event, that entity will be the
              sole Successor;

      (ii)    if only one entity directly or indirectly succeeds to more than 25 per cent. (but less than
              75 per cent.) of the Relevant Obligations of the Reference Entity by way of a Succession
              Event, and not more than 25 per cent. of the Relevant Obligations of the Reference
              Entity remain with the Reference Entity, the entity that succeeds to more than 25 per
              cent. of the Relevant Obligations will be the sole Successor;

      (iii)   if more than one entity each directly or indirectly succeed to more than 25 per cent. of
              the Relevant Obligations of the Reference Entity by way of a Succession Event, and not
              more than 25 per cent. of the Relevant Obligations of the Reference Entity remain with
              Reference Entity, the entities that succeed to more than 25 per cent. of the Relevant
              Obligations will each be a Successor and these Terms and Conditions and/or the
              applicable Final Terms will be adjusted as provided below;

      (iv)    if one or more entity each directly or indirectly succeed to more than 25 per cent. of the
              Relevant Obligations of the Reference Entity by way of a Succession Event, and more
              than 25 per cent. of the Relevant Obligations of the Reference Entity remain with the
              Reference Entity, each such entity and the Reference Entity will each be a Successor and
              these Terms and Conditions and/or the applicable Final Terms will be adjusted as
              provided below;

      (v)     if one or more entities directly or indirectly succeed to a portion of the Relevant
              Obligations of the Reference Entity by way of a Succession Event, but no entity
              succeeds to more than 25 per cent. of the Relevant Obligations of the Reference Entity
              and the Reference Entity continues to exist, there will be no Successor and the Reference
              Entity will not be changed in any way as a result of the Succession Event; and

      (vi)    if one or more entities directly or indirectly succeed to a portion of the Relevant
              Obligations of the Reference Entity by way of a Succession Event, but no entity
              succeeds to more than 25 per cent. of the Relevant Obligations of the Reference Entity
              and the Reference Entity ceases to exist, the entity which succeeds to the greatest
              percentage of Relevant Obligations (or, if two or more entities succeed to an equal
              percentage of Relevant Obligations, the entity from among those entities which succeeds
              to the greatest percentage of obligations of the Reference Entity) will be the sole
              Successor; and

(b)   in relation to a Sovereign Reference Entity, each entity which becomes a direct or indirect
      successor to such Reference Entity by way of a Succession Event irrespective of whether any
      such successor assume(s) any of the obligations of such Reference Entity.

      The Calculation Agent will be responsible for determining, as soon as reasonably practicable
      after it becomes aware of the relevant Succession Event (but no earlier than 14 calendar days
      after the legally effective date of the occurrence of the relevant Succession Event), and with
      effect from the legally effective date of the occurrence of the Succession Event, whether the
      relevant thresholds set forth above have been met, or which entity qualifies under (a)(vi) above,


                                               155
      as applicable provided that the Calculation Agent will not make any such determination if, at
      such time, either (A) ISDA has publicly announced that the conditions to convening a Credit
      Derivatives Determinations Committee to Resolve the matters described in (a) above and
      paragraphs (a) and (b)(A) of the definition of Succession Event Resolution Request Date (in
      the case of a Reference Entity that is not a Sovereign) or (b) above and paragraphs (a) and
      (b)(B) of the definition of Succession Event Resolution Request Date (in the case of a
      Sovereign Reference Entity) are satisfied in accordance with the Rules (until such time (if any)
      that ISDA subsequently publicly announces that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations
      Committee has Resolved not to determine a Successor) or (B) ISDA has publicly announced
      that the relevant Credit Derivatives Determinations Committee has Resolved that no event that
      constitutes a Succession Event has occurred. In calculating the percentages used to determine
      whether the relevant thresholds set forth above have been met, or which entity qualifies under
      (a)(vi) above, as applicable, the Calculation Agent shall use, in respect of each applicable
      Relevant Obligation included in such calculation, the amount of the liability in respect of such
      Relevant Obligation listed in the Best Available Information and shall, as soon as practicable
      after such calculation, make such calculation available for inspection by Noteholder(s) at the
      specified office of the Agent and, for so long as the Notes are listed on the Luxembourg Stock
      Exchange, at the office of the Paying Agent in Luxembourg.
      Where pursuant to paragraph (a)(iii) or (a)(iv) above, more than one Successor has been
      identified, the Calculation Agent shall adjust such of these Terms and Conditions and/or the
      applicable Final Terms as it shall determine to be appropriate to reflect that the relevant
      Reference Entity has been succeeded by more than one Successor and shall determine the
      effective date of that adjustment. The Calculation Agent shall be deemed to be acting in a
      commercially reasonable manner if it adjusts such of these Terms and Conditions and/or the
      applicable Final Terms in such a manner as to reflect the adjustment to and/or division of any
      credit derivative transaction(s) related to or underlying the Notes under the provisions of the
      2003 ISDA Credit Derivatives Definitions.
      Upon the Calculation Agent making such adjustment, the Issuer shall give notice as soon as
      practicable to Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14, stating the adjustment to these
      Terms and Conditions and/or the applicable Final Terms and giving brief details of the relevant
      Succession Event.
      For the purposes of this definition of “Successor”, “succeed” means, with respect to a
      Reference Entity and its Relevant Obligations (or, as applicable, obligations), that a party other
      than such Reference Entity (i) assumes or becomes liable for such Relevant Obligations (or, as
      applicable, obligations) whether by operation of law or pursuant to any agreement or (ii) issues
      Bonds that are exchanged for Relevant Obligations (or, as applicable, obligations), and in either
      case such Reference Entity is no longer an obligor (primarily or secondarily) or guarantor with
      respect to such Relevant Obligations (or, as applicable, obligations). The determinations
      required pursuant to paragraph (a) of this definition of “Successor” shall be made, in the case
      of an exchange offer, on the basis of the Outstanding Principal Balance of Relevant Obligations
      tendered and accepted in the exchange and not on the basis of the Outstanding Principal
      Balance of Bonds for which Relevant Obligations have been exchanged.
      Where:
      (A)   a Reference Obligation is specified in the applicable Final Terms; and
      (B)   one or more Successors to the Reference Entity have been identified; and
      (C)   any one or more such Successors have not assumed the Reference Obligation,
      a Substitute Reference Obligation will be determined in accordance with the definition of
      “Substitute Reference Obligation” above.
“Supranational Organisation” means any entity or organisation established by treaty or other
arrangement between two or more Sovereigns or the Sovereign Agencies of two or more Sovereigns,


                                              156
and includes, without limiting the foregoing, the International Monetary Fund, European Central
Bank, International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development.
“Trade Date” means the date specified as such in the applicable Final Terms.
“Transaction Auction Settlement Terms” means, with respect to a Credit Event, the Credit Derivatives
Auction Settlement Terms selected by the Calculation Agent in accordance with this provision. In
relation to a Credit Event (and as set out in the definition of Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement
Terms), ISDA may publish one or more form(s) of Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement Terms on
its website at www.isda.org (or any successor website thereto) and may amend such forms from time
to time. Each such form of Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement Terms shall set out, inter alia,
definitions of “Auction”, “Auction Cancellation Date”, “Auction Covered Transaction” and “Auction
Final Price Determination Date” in relation to the relevant Credit Event. The Transaction Auction
Settlement Terms for purposes of the Notes shall be the relevant form of Credit Derivatives Auction
Settlement Terms for which the Reference Transaction would be an Auction Covered Transaction (as
such term will be set out in the relevant Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement Terms). The Reference
Transaction (as set out in the definition thereof) is a hypothetical credit derivative transaction included
in this Condition 24 principally for the purpose of selecting the Credit Derivatives Auction Settlement
Terms appropriate to the Notes.
“Undeliverable Obligation” means a Deliverable Obligation included in the Asset Amount which, on
the Settlement Date for such Deliverable Obligation, the Calculation Agent determines for any reason
(including without limitation, failure of the relevant clearance system or due to any law, regulation,
court order or market conditions or the non-receipt of any requisite consents with respect to the
Delivery of Loans) it is impossible or illegal to Deliver on the Settlement Date.
“Unwind Costs” means the amount specified in the applicable Final Terms or if “Standard Unwind
Costs” are specified in the applicable Final Terms, an amount determined by the Calculation Agent
equal to the sum of (without duplication) all costs, fees, charges, expenses (including loss of funding),
tax and duties incurred by the Issuer and/or any of its Affiliates in connection with the redemption of
the Notes and the related termination, settlement or re¬establishment of any hedge or related trading
position, such amount to be apportioned pro rata amongst each nominal amount of Notes equal to the
Calculation Amount.
“Valuation Date” means (a) where Physical Delivery is specified as applying in the applicable Final
Terms the day falling three Business Days after the Final Delivery Date (as such term is defined in the
Condition 24(i)), or (b) where Cash Settlement is specified as applying in the applicable Final Terms,
if “Single Valuation Date” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the date that is the number of
Business Days specified in the Final Terms after the satisfaction of all Conditions to Settlement or, if
the number of Business Days is not so specified, five Business Days after the satisfaction of all
Conditions to Settlement (or, if Cash Settlement is applicable pursuant to the Fallback Settlement
Method, the date that is the number of Business Days specified in the applicable Final Terms or, if the
number of Business Days is not so specified, five Business Days after the Auction Cancellation Date,
if any, or the relevant No Auction Announcement Date, if any, as applicable), and if “Multiple
Valuation Dates” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, each of the following dates:
(i)    subject to Condition 24(k), the date that is the number of Business Days specified in the
       applicable Final Terms (or, if the number of Business Days is not specified, five Business Days)
       following the satisfaction of all Conditions to Settlement (or if Cash Settlement is the
       applicable Fallback Settlement Method, the date that is the number of Business Days specified
       in the applicable Final Terms (or, if the number of Business Days is not specified, five Business
       Days) following the Auction Cancellation Date, if any, or the relevant No Auction
       Announcement Date, if any, as applicable); and
(ii)   each successive date that is the number of Business Days specified in the applicable Final
       Terms or, if the number of Business Days is not so specified, five Business Days after the date



                                               157
      on which the Calculation Agent obtains a Market Value with respect to the immediately
      preceding Valuation Date.
When “Multiple Valuation Dates” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the total number of
Valuation Dates shall be equal to the number of Valuation Dates specified in the applicable Final
Terms (or, if the number of Valuation Dates is not so specified, five Valuation Dates).
If neither Single Valuation Date nor Multiple Valuation Dates is specified in the applicable Final
Terms, Single Valuation Date shall apply.
“Valuation Method”:
(a)   The following Valuation Methods may be specified in the applicable Final Terms with only one
      Reference Obligation and only one Valuation Date:
      (i)     “Market” means the Market Value determined by the Calculation Agent with respect to
              the Valuation Date; or
      (ii)    “Highest” means the highest Quotation obtained by the Calculation Agent with respect
              to the Valuation Date.
      If no such Valuation Method is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Valuation Method
      shall be Highest.
(b)   The following Valuation Methods may be specified in the applicable Final Terms with only one
      Reference Obligation and more than one Valuation Date:
      (i)     “Average Market” means the unweighted arithmetic mean of the Market Values
              determined by the Calculation Agent with respect to each Valuation Date; or
      (ii)    “Highest” means the highest Quotation obtained by the Calculation Agent with respect
              to any Valuation Date; or
      (iii)   “Average Highest” means the unweighted arithmetic mean of the highest Quotations
              obtained by the Calculation Agent with respect to each Valuation Date.
      If no such Valuation Method is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Valuation Method
      shall be Average Highest.
(c)   The following Valuation Methods may be specified in the applicable Final Terms with more
      than one Reference Obligation and only one Valuation Date:
      (i)     “Blended Market” means the unweighted arithmetic mean of the Market Value for each
              Reference Obligation determined by the Calculation Agent with respect to the Valuation
              Date; or
      (ii)    “Blended Highest” means the unweighted arithmetic mean of the highest Quotations
              obtained by the Calculation Agent for each Reference Obligation with respect to the
              Valuation Date.
      If no such Valuation Method is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Valuation Method
      shall be Blended Highest.
(d)   The following Valuation Methods may be specified in the applicable Final Terms with more
      than one Reference Obligation and more than one Valuation Date:
      (i)     “Average Blended Market” means, using values with respect to each Valuation Date
              determined by the Calculation Agent in accordance with the Blended Market Valuation
              Method, the unweighted arithmetic mean of the values so determined with respect to
              each Valuation Date; or
      (ii)    “Average Blended Highest” means, using values with respect to each Valuation Date
              determined by the Calculation Agent in accordance with the Blended Highest Valuation



                                             158
                   Method, the unweighted arithmetic mean of the values so determined with respect to
                   each Valuation Date.
             If no such Valuation Method is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Valuation Method
             shall be Average Blended Highest.
      (e)    Notwithstanding paragraphs (a) to (d) above, if Quotations include Weighted Average
             Quotations or fewer than two Full Quotations, the Valuation Method shall be Market, Average
             Market, Blended Market or Average Blended Market, as the case may be.
      “Valuation Time” means the time specified as such in the applicable Final Terms or, if no time is so
      specified, 11.00 a.m. in the principal trading market for the Reference Obligation.
      “Weighted Average Quotation” means in accordance with the Quotation Method, the weighted
      average of firm quotations obtained from Quotation Dealers at the Valuation Time, to the extent
      reasonably practicable, each for an amount of the Reference Obligation with an Outstanding Principal
      Balance of as large a size as available but less than the Quotation Amount (but, if a Minimum
      Quotation Amount is specified in the applicable Final Terms, of a size equal to the Minimum
      Quotation Amount or, if quotations of a size equal to the Minimum Quotation Amount are not
      available, quotations as near in size as practicable to the Minimum Quotation Amount) that in
      aggregate are approximately equal to the Quotation Amount.

(n)   Credit Event Notice after Restructuring Credit Event
      If Condition 24(n) is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, then, notwithstanding
      anything to the contrary in these Terms and Conditions, upon the occurrence of a Restructuring with
      respect to a Series for which either “Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable
      Obligation Applicable” or “Modified Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally
      Transferable Obligation Applicable” is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms:

      (i)    the Calculation Agent may deliver multiple Credit Event Notices in respect of such
             Restructuring, each such Credit Event Notice setting forth an amount (the “Partial Redemption
             Amount”) that may be less than the nominal amount outstanding of each Note immediately
             prior to the delivery of such Credit Event Notice. In such circumstances the provisions of
             Condition 24 shall be deemed to apply to the Partial Redemption Amount only and each such
             Note shall be redeemed in part (such redeemed part being equal to the Partial Redemption
             Amount).

      (ii)   For the avoidance of doubt (A) the nominal amount of each such Note not so redeemed in part
             shall remain outstanding and interest shall accrue on the nominal amount outstanding of such
             Note as provided in Condition 5 (adjusted in such manner as the Calculation Agent determines
             to be appropriate), (B) the provisions of Condition 24 shall apply to such nominal amount
             outstanding of such Note in the event that subsequent Credit Event Notices are delivered in
             respect of the Reference Entity that was the subject of the Restructuring Credit Event, (C) once
             a Credit Event Notice with respect to a Restructuring Credit Event has been delivered in respect
             of a Reference Entity, no further Credit Event Notices may be delivered in respect of any
             Reference Entity other than the Reference Entity that was the subject of the Restructuring
             Credit Event and (D) if, following a Restructuring Credit Event, different Credit Event
             Determination Dates have been determined with respect to different portions of amounts
             payable to Noteholders under the relevant Series, the Calculation Agent will (x) determine such
             adjustment(s) to these Terms and Conditions as may be required to achieve as far as practicable
             the same economic effect as if each such portion was a separate series or otherwise reflect or
             account for the effect of the above provisions of this Condition 24(n) and (y) the effective date
             of such adjustment(s).

      (c)    If the provisions of this Condition 24(n) apply in respect of the Notes, on redemption of part
             of each such Note the relevant Note or, if the Notes are represented by a Global Note, such
             Global Note, shall be endorsed to reflect such part redemption.



                                                    159
(o)   Provisions relating to Multiple Holder Obligation
      If Condition 24(o) is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, then, notwithstanding
      anything to the contrary in the definition of Restructuring and related provisions, the occurrence of,
      agreement to, or announcement of, any of the events described in sub-paragraphs (i) to (v) of the
      definition of “Restructuring” shall not be a Restructuring unless the Obligation in respect of any such
      events is a Multiple Holder Obligation.

      “Multiple Holder Obligation” means an Obligation that (i) at the time of the event which constitutes
      a Restructuring Credit Event is held by more than three holders that are not Affiliates of each other
      and (ii) with respect to which a percentage of holders (determined pursuant to the terms of the
      Obligation as in effect on the date of such event) at least equal to 662⁄3 is required to consent to the
      event which constitutes a Restructuring Credit Event.

(p)   Provisions taken from the ISDA supplement titled “Additional Provisions for Physically Settled
      Default Swaps – Monoline Insurer as Reference Entity (January 2005)”
      If Condition 24(p) is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, the following provisions
      will apply:

      (a)   Obligation and Deliverable Obligation. Paragraph (a) of the definition of “Obligation” in
            Condition 24(m) and paragraph (a) of the definition of “Deliverable Obligation” in Condition
            24(m) are hereby amended by adding “or Qualifying Policy” after as provider of a Qualifying
            Affiliate Guarantee”.
      (b)   Interpretation of Provisions. In the event that an Obligation or a Deliverable Obligation is a
            Qualifying Policy, paragraph (B) of the definition of “Deliverable Obligation” in Condition
            24(m) will apply, with references to the Qualifying Guarantee, the Underlying Obligation and
            the Underlying Obligor deemed to include the Qualifying Policy, the Insured Instrument and
            the Insured Obligor, respectively, except that:
            (i)     the Obligation Category Borrowed Money and the Obligation Category and Deliverable
                    Obligation Category Bond shall be deemed to include distributions payable under an
                    Insured Instrument in the form of a pass-through certificate or similar funded beneficial
                    interest, the Deliverable Obligation Category Bond shall be deemed to include such an
                    Insured Instrument, and the terms “obligation” and “obligor” as used in this Condition
                    24 in respect of such an Insured Instrument shall be construed accordingly;
            (ii)    references in the definitions of Assignable Loan and Consent Required Loan to “the
                    guarantor” and “guaranteeing” shall be deemed to include “the insurer” and “insuring”,
                    respectively;
            (iii)   neither the Qualifying Policy nor the Insured Instrument must satisfy on the relevant
                    date the Deliverable Obligation Characteristic of Accelerated or Matured, whether or not
                    that characteristic is otherwise specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms;
            (iv)    if the Assignable Loan, Consent Required Loan, Direct Loan Participation or
                    Transferable Deliverable Obligation Characteristics are specified in the applicable Final
                    Terms and if the benefit of the Qualifying Policy is not transferred as part of any transfer
                    of the Insured Instrument, the Qualifying Policy must be transferable at least to the same
                    extent as the Insured Instrument; and
            (v)     with respect to an Insured Instrument in the form of a pass-through certificate or similar
                    funded beneficial interest, the term “Outstanding Principal Balance” shall mean the
                    outstanding Certificate Balance and “maturity”, as such term is used in the Maximum
                    Maturity Deliverable Obligation Characteristic, shall mean the specified date by which
                    the Qualifying Policy guarantees or insures, as applicable, that the ultimate distribution
                    of the Certificate Balance will occur.




                                                     160
      For the avoidance of doubt, if Condition 24 is specified as applying in the applicable Final
      Terms, the amendments to paragraph (B) of the definition of "Deliverable Obligation" provided
      in Condition 24(q)(ii) shall not be construed to apply to Qualifying Policies and Insured
      Instruments.
(c)   Not Contingent. An Insured Instrument will not be regarded as failing to satisfy the Not
      Contingent Deliverable Obligation Characteristic solely because such Insured Instrument is
      subject to provisions limiting recourse in respect of such Insured Instrument to the proceeds of
      specified assets (including proceeds subject to a priority of payments) or reducing the amount
      of any Instrument Payments owing under such Insured Instrument, provided that such
      provisions are not applicable to the Qualifying Policy by the terms thereof and the Qualifying
      Policy continues to guarantee or insure, as applicable, the Instrument Payments that would have
      been required to be made absent any such limitation or reduction. By specifying that this
      Condition 24(p) is applicable, no inference should be made as to the interpretation of the “Not
      Contingent” Deliverable Obligation Characteristic in the context of limited recourse or similar
      terms applicable to Deliverable Obligations other than Qualifying Policies.
(d)   Deliver. For the purposes of the definition of “Deliver” in Condition 24(m), “Deliver” with
      respect to an obligation that is a Qualifying Policy means to Deliver both the Insured
      Instrument and the benefit of the Qualifying Policy (or a custodial receipt issued by an
      internationally recognised custodian representing an interest in such an Insured Instrument and
      the related Qualifying Policy), and “Delivery” and “Delivered” will be construed accordingly.
(e)   Provisions for Determining a Successor. The paragraph commencing “For the purposes of this
      definition of “Successor”...”in the definition of “Successor” in Condition 24(m) is hereby
      amended by adding “or insurer” after “or guarantor”.
(f)   Substitute Reference Obligation. The first paragraph of the definition of “Substitute Reference
      Obligation” and paragraph (b) thereof in Condition 24(m) is hereby amended by adding “or
      Qualifying Policy” after “or as provider of a Qualifying Affiliate Guarantee”. For the purposes
      of sub-paragraph (a)(ii)(B) the definition of “Substitute Reference Obligation” references to
      “the Qualifying Guarantee” and the “Underlying Obligation” shall be deemed to include “the
      Qualifying Policy” and “the Insured Instrument”, respectively.
(g)   Restructuring
      (a)   With respect to an Insured Instrument that is in the form of a pass-through certificate or
            similar funded beneficial interest or a Qualifying Policy with respect thereto, paragraphs
            (i) to (v) inclusive of the definition of “Restructuring” are hereby amended to read as
            follows:
            “(i)    a reduction in the rate or amount or the Instrument Payments in paragraph (A)(x)
                    of the definition thereof that are guaranteed or insured by the Qualifying Policy;
            (ii)    a reduction in the amount of the Instrument Payments described in paragraph
                    (A)(y) of the definition thereof that are guaranteed or insured by the Qualifying
                    Policy;
            (iii)   a postponement or other deferral of a date or dates for either (x) the payment or
                    accrual of the Instrument Payments described in paragraph (A)(x) of the
                    definition thereof or (y) the payment of the Instrument Payments described in
                    paragraph (A)(y) of the definition thereof, in each case that are guaranteed or
                    insured by the Qualifying Policy;
            (iv)    a change in the ranking in priority of payment of (x) any Obligation under a
                    Qualifying Policy in respect of Instrument Payments, causing the Subordination
                    of such Obligation to any other Obligation or (y) any Instrument Payments,
                    causing the Subordination of such Insured Instrument to any other instrument in
                    the form of a pass-through certificate or similar funded beneficial interest issued



                                             161
                    by the Insured Obligor, it being understood that, for this purpose, Subordination
                    will be deemed to include any such change that results in a lower ranking under
                    a priority of payments provision applicable to the relevant Instrument Payments;
                    or
             (v)    any change in the currency or composition of any payment of Instrument
                    Payments that are guaranteed or insured by the Qualifying Policy to any currency
                    which is not a Permitted Currency.”
      (b)    Paragraph (c) of the definition of “Restructuring” is hereby amended by adding “or, in
             the case of a Qualifying Policy and an Insured Instrument, where (A) the Qualifying
             Policy continues to guarantee or insure, as applicable, that the same Instrument
             Payments will be made on the same dates on which the Qualifying Policy guaranteed or
             insured that such Instrument Payments would be made prior to such event and (B) such
             event is not a change in the ranking in the priority of payment of the Qualifying Policy”
             after “Reference Entity”.
      (c)    The definition of “Restructuring” is hereby amended by the insertion of the following
             paragraph after the final paragraph thereof:
      “For purposes of the definition of “Restructuring” and if Condition 24(o) is specified as
      applying in the applicable Final Terms, for the purposes of the Conditions the term Obligation
      shall be deemed to include Insured Instruments for which the Reference Entity is acting as
      provider of a Qualifying Policy. In the case of a Qualifying Policy and an Insured Instrument,
      references to the Reference Entity in the definition of “Restructuring” shall be deemed to refer
      to the Insured Obligor and the references to the Reference Entity in paragraphs (a) to (c)
      inclusive in the definition of “Restructuring" shall continue to refer to the Reference Entity.”
(h)   Fully Transferable Obligation and Conditionally Transferable Obligation. In the event that
      “Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Fully Transferable Obligation” and/or “Modified
      Restructuring Maturity Limitation and Conditionally Transferable Obligation” is specified as
      applying in the applicable Final Terms and a Fully Transferable Obligation or Conditionally
      Transferable Obligation is a Qualifying Policy, the Insured Instrument must meet the
      requirements of the relevant definition. References in the definition of “Conditionally
      Transferable Obligation” to the “guarantor” and “guaranteeing” shall be deemed to include
      “the “insurer” and “insuring” respectively. With respect to an Insured Instrument in the form of
      a pass-through certificate or similar funded beneficial interest, the term “final maturity date”,
      as such term is used in Condition 24(d) and the definition of “Restructuring Maturity
      Limitation Date”, shall mean the specified date by which the Qualifying Policy guarantees or
      insures, as applicable, that the ultimate distribution of the Certificate Balance will occur.
(i)   Other Provisions. For purposes of paragraph (a)(ii) of the definition of “Deliverable
      Obligation” and the definitions of “Credit Event” and “Deliver” in Condition 24(m) references
      to “the Underlying Obligation” and “the Underlying Obligor” shall be deemed to include
      “Insured Instruments” and the “Insured Obligor”, respectively.

(j)   Additional Definitions
      “Qualifying Policy” means a financial guaranty insurance policy or similar financial guarantee
      pursuant to which a Reference Entity irrevocably guarantees or insures all Instrument
      Payments of an instrument that constitutes Borrowed Money (modified as set forth in this
      Condition 24(m)) (the “Insured Instrument”) for which another party (including a special
      purpose entity or trust) is the obligor (the “Insured Obligor”). Qualifying Policies shall exclude
      any arrangement (i) structured as a surety bond, letter of credit or equivalent legal arrangement
      or (ii) pursuant to the express contractual terms of which the payment obligations of the
      Reference Entity can be discharged or reduced as a result of the occurrence or non-occurrence
      of an event or circumstance (other than the payment of Instrument Payments).




                                              162
            “Instrument Payments” means (A) in the case of any Insured Instrument that is in the form of
            a pass-through certificate or similar funded beneficial interest, (x) the specified periodic
            distributions in respect of interest or other return on the Certificate Balance on or prior to the
            ultimate distribution of the Certificate Balance and (y) the ultimate distribution of the
            Certificate Balance on or prior to a specified date and (B) in the case of any other Insured
            Instrument, the scheduled payments of principal and interest, in the case of both (A) and (B)
            (1) determined without regard to limited recourse or reduction provisions of the type described
            in Condition 24(n)(c) above and (2) excluding sums in respect of default interest, indemnities,
            tax gross-ups, make-whole amounts, early redemption premiums and other similar amounts
            (whether or not guaranteed or insured by the Qualifying Policy).
            “Certificate Balance” means, in the case of an Insured Instrument that is in the form of a pass-
            through certificate or similar funded beneficial interest, the unit principal balance, certificate
            balance or similar measure of unreimbursed principal investment.

(q)   Supplement to provisions relating to Qualifying Guarantee and Underlying Obligation
      (a)   If Condition 24(q) is specified as applicable in the applicable Final Terms, Condition 24(m)
            shall be amended by:
            (i)     the deletion of the definition of “Downstream Affiliate” and the substitution of the
                    following therefor:
                    “Downstream Affiliate” means an entity whose outstanding Voting Shares were, at the
                    date of issuance of the Qualifying Guarantee, more than 50 per cent. owned, directly or
                    indirectly, by the Reference Entity.”;
            (ii)    the deletion of paragraphs (B)(4)(ii) and (B)(4)(iii) of the definition of “Deliverable
                    Obligation”, the substitution of the following therefor and the re-numbering of the
                    remaining paragraphs accordingly:
                    “(ii)   For purposes of the application of the Obligation Characteristics or the
                            Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, both the Qualifying Guarantee and the
                            Underlying Obligation must satisfy on the relevant date each of the applicable
                            Obligation Characteristics or Deliverable Obligation Characteristics, if any,
                            specified in the applicable Final Terms from the following list: Not Subordinated,
                            Specified Currency, Not Sovereign Lender, Not Domestic Currency and Not
                            Domestic Law. For these purposes, unless otherwise specified in the applicable
                            Final Terms, (A) the lawful currency of any of Canada, Japan, Switzerland, the
                            United Kingdom or the United States of America or the euro shall not be a
                            Domestic Currency and (B) the laws of England and the laws of the State of New
                            York shall not be a Domestic Law.”; and
            (iii)   the deletion of the definition of “Qualifying Guarantee” and the substitution of the
                    following therefor:
                    “Qualifying Guarantee” means an arrangement evidenced by a written instrument
                    pursuant to which a Reference Entity irrevocably agrees (by guarantee of payment or
                    equivalent legal arrangement) to pay all amounts due under an obligation (the
                    “Underlying Obligation”) for which another party is the obligor (the “Underlying
                    Obligor”). Qualifying Guarantees shall exclude any arrangement (i) structured as a
                    surety bond, financial guarantee insurance policy, letter of credit or equivalent legal
                    arrangement or (ii) pursuant to the terms of which the payment obligations of the
                    Reference Entity can be discharged, reduced or otherwise altered or assigned (other than
                    by operation of law) as a result of the occurrence or non-occurrence of an event or
                    circumstance (other than payment). The benefit of a Qualifying Guarantee must be
                    capable of being Delivered together with the Delivery of the Underlying
                    Obligation.”; and



                                                     163
      (b)   Condition 24(o) shall be amended by the insertion of the following at the end of the first
            paragraph thereof:
            “provided that any Obligation that is a Bond shall be deemed to satisfy the requirement in (ii)
            of the definition of “Multiple Holder Obligation” below”.

(r)   Calculation Agent Notices
      Any notice to be delivered by the Calculation Agent to the Issuer or the Guarantor, as applicable,
      pursuant to this Condition 24 may be given in writing (including by facsimile and/or email) and/or by
      telephone. Any such notice delivered on or prior to 4.00 p.m. (Calculation Agent City time) on a
      Calculation Agent City Business Day will be effective on such Calculation Agent City Business Day.
      Any such notice delivered after 4.00 p.m. (Calculation Agent City time) on a Calculation Agent City
      Business Day or on a day which is not a Calculation Agent City Business Day will be deemed
      effective on the next following Calculation Agent City Business Day, regardless of the form in which
      it is delivered. For purposes of the two preceding sentences, a notice given by telephone will be
      deemed to have been delivered at the time the telephone conversation takes place. If the notice is
      delivered by telephone, a written confirmation will be executed and delivered confirming the
      substance of that notice within one Calculation Agent City Business Day of that notice. Failure to
      provide that written confirmation will not affect the effectiveness of that telephonic notice.




                                                   164
   SCHEDULE TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES
       (OTHER THAN UNDATED DEEPLY SUBORDINATED NOTES)

                                                 PART 1

                        FORM OF ASSET TRANSFER NOTICE
          [For use in respect of Notes represented by a Global Note or Notes in definitive form]

                       [BES FINANCE LTD./BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.]1
                                 [title of relevant Series of Notes]
                                        issued pursuant to the
                                            €20,000,000,000

                                  Euro Medium Term Note Programme
When completed, this Notice should be delivered (if the Note to which this Notice relates is represented by
a Global Note) in such manner as is acceptable to Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may
be, (which is expected to be by authenticated SWIFT message or by tested telex) to Euroclear or
Clearstream, Luxembourg (as applicable) with a copy to the Issuer or (if the Note to which this Notice relates
is in definitive form) in writing with the Note to any Paying Agent with a copy to the Issuer, as the case may
be, in either case not later than the close of business in each place of reception on the Cut-Off Date.
[To:   [Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V.                             [or:   Clearstream Banking, société anonyme
       1 Boulevard du Roi Albert II                                 42 Avenue JF Kennedy
       B-1210 Brussels                                              L-2967
       Belgium                                                      Luxembourg
       Attention: Custody Processing Department                     Attention: OCE Department
       Telex: 61025 MGTEC B]*                                       Telex: 2791]*]1

[To:   [The Bank of New York Mellon, London Branch           [or:   The Bank of New York Mellon
       One Canada Square                                            (Luxembourg) S.A.
       London E14 5AL                                               Aerogolf Center 1A
       Telefax: +44 20 7964 2536                                    Hoehenhof
       Attention: Corporate Trust Administration]*                  L-1736 Senningerberg
                                                                    Luxembourg
                                                                    Telefax: +352 34 2090 5630
                                                                    Attention: Peter Bun]*]2

Copy: [Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.                            [or:   BES Finance Ltd.
      Avenida da Liberdade 195                                      PO Box 309, Ugland House
      1250 Lisbon                                                   Grand Cayman KY1-1104
      Portugal                                                      Cayman Islands
      Telefax: [•]                                                  Telefax: +351 21 350 8687
      Attention: Financial Markets and Research                     Attention: International Debt
      Department ]*                                                 Securities]*
The Paying Agent with whom any definitive Notes are deposited will not in any circumstances be liable
to the depositing Noteholder or any other person for any loss or damage arising from any act, default
or omission of such Paying Agent in relation to the said definitive Notes or any of them unless such loss
or damage was caused by the fraud or gross negligence of such Paying Agent or its directors, officers
or employees.
Failure properly to complete and deliver this Notice (in the determination of [[Euroclear/Clearstream,
Luxembourg*]1/the Issuer2]) may result in this Notice being treated as null and void.
Expressions defined in the Terms and Conditions of the Notes shall bear the same meanings herein.




                                                     165
I/We*, the [Accountholder1/Noteholder2] specified in 1 below, being the holder of the Notes, request that
Banco Espírito Santo, S.A./BES Finance Ltd.* (the “Issuer”) deliver the relevant Asset Amount(s) to which
I am/we are* entitled in relation to such Notes, all in accordance with the Conditions.

1.        Name(s) and Address(es) of [Accountholder1/Noteholder2]

2.        Details required for delivery of the relevant Asset Amount(s) as set out in applicable Final
          Terms

3.        Name and address of person from whom details may be obtained for the delivery of the
          relevant Asset Amount

[4.]      [Nominal amount of Notes subject of this Notice]1

[5.]      [Instructions to Euroclear/Clearstream, Luxembourg*

          I/We* hereby irrevocably authorise and instruct Euroclear/Clearstream, Luxembourg* to debit the
          Note (s) referred to above from the Account referred to below on or before the Settlement Date.

          Account
          No:
          Name:                      ]1

[6.]      Delivery Expenses

          I/We* hereby irrevocably undertake to pay all Delivery Expenses in respect of the relevant Asset
          Amount(s) [and irrevocably authorise Euroclear/Clearstream, Luxembourg* to debit my/our* specified
          account at Euroclear/Clearstream, Luxembourg* in respect thereof and to pay such Delivery
          Expenses]1
[7.]      Noteholder’s [Euroclear/Clearstream, Luxembourg*]1 Account for payment of any amounts
          payable pursuant to Condition 24(j) or any other cash amount specified in the applicable Final
          Terms as being payable
          I/We* hereby instruct that any amounts payable pursuant to Condition 24(j) or any other cash amount
          specified in the applicable Final Terms payable to me/us* shall be credited to the
          [Euroclear/Clearstream, Luxembourg*]1 Account referred to below.
          Account
          No:
          Name:
          [Name and address of bank or institution
          at which such Account is held:]1

[8.]      Authorisation of production in proceedings

          I/We* hereby authorise the production of this Notice in any administrative or legal proceedings
          instituted in connection with the Note or Notes to which this Notice relates.

          Signed................................................

          Date..............................
Notes:
*      Delete as appropriate.
1      Delete if the Note to which this Notice relates is in definitive form.
2      Delete if the Note to which this Notice relates is represented by a Global Note.




                                                                    166
This Notice is not valid unless all of the paragraphs requiring completion are duly completed and, if
the Notes which are the subject of this Notice are represented by a Global Note, this Notice is
accompanied by evidence from either Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg of the holder’s
entitlement to the Notes and that the holder’s account with Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg in
which such Notes are held has been blocked. Once validly given this Notice is irrevocable except in any
circumstances which may be set out in the Agency Agreement.




                                                 167
      SCHEDULE TO THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES
       (OTHER THAN UNDATED DEEPLY SUBORDINATED NOTES)

                                                PART 2

       FORM OF INTERBOLSA NOTES ASSET TRANSFER NOTICE
                                  [For use in respect of Interbolsa Notes]

                                    BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO S.A.

                                 € [•] per cent. Interbolsa Notes due [•]

                                          issued pursuant to the
                                              €20,000,000,000

                                  Euro Medium Term Note Programme

When completed, this Notice should be delivered with the Certificate, in such manner as is acceptable to the
Portuguese Paying Agent, to the Portuguese Paying Agent with a copy to the Issuer, not later than the close
of business in each place of reception on the Cut-Off Date.

To:    Banco Espírito Santo, S.A., as Portuguese Paying Agent
       Avenida da Liberdade 195
       1250 Lisbon
       Portugal
       Telefax: [+351 21 310 89 24]
       Attention: [Luis Miguel Aires]

Copy: [Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.                                  [or: BES Finance Ltd.
      Avenida da Liberdade 195                                     PO Box 309, Ugland House
      1250 Lisbon                                                  Grand Cayman KY1-1104
      Portugal                                                     Cayman Islands
      Telefax: [•]                                                 Telefax: +351 21 350 8687
      Attention: Financial Markets and Research                    Attention: International Debt Securities]*
      Department ]*

The Portuguese Paying Agent with whom any Certificates are deposited will not in any circumstances
be liable to the depositing Noteholder or any other person for any loss or damage arising from any act,
default or omission of the Portuguese Paying Agent in relation to the said Certificates or any of them
unless such loss or damage was caused by the fraud or gross negligence of the Portuguese Paying
Agent or its directors, officers or employees.

Failure properly to complete and deliver this Notice (in the determination of Portuguese Paying Agent) may
result in this Notice being treated as null and void.

Expressions defined in the Terms and Conditions of the Notes shall bear the same meanings herein.

I/We*, the Noteholder specified in 1 below, being the holder of the Notes, request that Banco Espírito Santo,
S.A./BES Finance Ltd.* (the “Issuer”) deliver the relevant Asset Amount(s) to which I am/we are* entitled in
relation to such Notes, all in accordance with the Conditions.

1.     Name(s) and Address(es) of Noteholder

2.     Details required for delivery of the relevant Asset Amount(s) as set out in applicable Final
       Terms




                                                    168
3.       Name and address of person from whom details may be obtained for the delivery of the
         relevant Asset Amount

4.       Nominal amount of Notes subject of this Notice

5.       Instructions to the Portuguese Paying Agent

         I/We* hereby irrevocably authorise and instruct the Portuguese Paying Agent to debit the Interbolsa
         Note(s) referred to above from the Account referred to below on or before the Settlement Date.
         Account
         No:
         Name:                       ]

6.       Delivery Expenses
         I/We* hereby irrevocably undertake to pay all Delivery Expenses in respect of the relevant Asset
         Amount(s) [and irrevocably authorise the Portuguese Paying Agent to debit my/our* specified
         individual account specified below in respect thereof and to pay such Delivery Expenses]1
         Account
         No:
         Name:
         [Name and address of bank or institution
         at which such Account is held:]

7.       Noteholder’s details for payment of any amounts payable pursuant to Condition 24(j) or any
         other cash amount specified in the applicable Final Terms as being payable
         I/We* hereby instruct that any amounts payable pursuant to Condition 24(j) or any other cash amount
         specified in the applicable Final Terms payable to me/us* shall:

         [(a)     be credited to the Account referred to below.
                  Account
                  No:
                  Name:
                  [Name and address of bank or institution
                  at which such Account is held:]; or

         (b)      be sent by [currency] cheque drawn on a bank in [currency centre] and in favour of [name of
                  payee] and mailed at the payee’s risk by uninsured airmail post to [name of addressee] at
                  [addressee’s address].]*

8.       Authorisation of production in proceedings
         I/We* hereby authorise the production of this Notice in any administrative or legal proceedings
         instituted in connection with the Note or Notes to which this Notice relates.

         Signed................................................

         Date..............................
Notes:
*    Delete as appropriate.

This Notice is not valid unless all of the paragraphs requiring completion are duly completed and, if
the Notes which are the subject of this Notice are represented by a Global Note, this Notice is
accompanied by evidence from either Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg of the holder’s
entitlement to the Notes and that the holder’s account with Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg in
which such Notes are held has been blocked. Once validly given this Notice is irrevocable except in any
circumstances which may be set out in the Agency Agreement.


                                                                  169
           TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE UNDATED DEEPLY
                      SUBORDINATED NOTES
The following are the Terms and Conditions of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes (the “Notes” or the           A5.4.6

“Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes”) which will be incorporated by reference into each Note cleared by            A12.4.1.7

LCH Clearnet, S.A. the clearing system operated at Interbolsa – Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de
Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários S.A., each global Note and each definitive
Note, in the latter case only if permitted by the rules of the relevant stock exchange or other relevant
authority (if any) and agreed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. and the relevant Dealer at the time of issue. If
not so permitted and agreed, such definitive Note will have endorsed thereon or attached thereto such Terms
and Conditions. The applicable Final Terms in relation to any Tranche of Notes may specify other terms and
conditions which shall, to the extent so specified or to the extent inconsistent with the following Terms and
Conditions, replace or modify the following Terms and Conditions for the purpose of such Notes. The
applicable Final Terms (or the relevant provisions thereof) will be endorsed upon, or attached to, each
temporary global Note, permanent global Note and definitive Note and will be incorporated into and
applicable to each Interbolsa Note (as defined below). Reference should be made to “Form of the Notes”
above for the form of the Final Terms which will include the definitions of certain terms used in the following
Terms and Conditions or specify which of such terms are to apply in relation to the relevant Notes.

This Note may only be issued by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the “Bank”) acting through its head office and
is one of a Series (as defined below) of Notes issued by the Bank as specified in the applicable Final Terms
constituted, except in the case of Interbolsa Notes (as defined below), by a Trust Deed dated 3rd February,
1997 (such Trust Deed as modified and/or supplemented and/or restated from time to time, the “Trust Deed”)
made between the Bank and BES Finance Ltd. (“BES Finance”), the Bank in its capacity as guarantor of
Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes) issued by BES Finance (in such capacity, the
“Guarantor”) and The Bank of New York Mellon (formerly J.P. Morgan Trustee and Depositary Company
Limited and Chase Manhattan Trustees Limited) (the “Trustee”, which expression shall wherever the context
permits include all other persons or companies for the time being acting as trustee under the Trust Deed).
Interbolsa Notes are constituted by entries in the individual securities accounts opened by Noteholders with
the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa (as defined below).

References herein to the “Notes” or to “Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes” shall be references to the
Notes of this Series and shall mean:

(i)     in relation to any Notes represented by a global Note, units of each Specified Denomination in the
        Specified Currency;

(ii)    definitive Notes issued in exchange for a global Note;

(iii)   any global Note; and

(iv)    Notes held through Interbolsa – Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas
        Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa”) (each an “Interbolsa Note”).

The Notes (other than Interbolsa Notes) and the Coupons (as defined below) also have the benefit of an
amended and restated Agency Agreement (the “Principal Agency Agreement”) dated 18th January, 2008
made among the Bank and BES Finance, the Guarantor, the Trustee, The Bank of New York Mellon
(formerly JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.) as issuing and principal paying agent and agent bank (the “Agent”,
which expression shall include any successor agent specified in the applicable Final Terms) and the other
paying agents named therein. The Interbolsa Notes have the benefit of the Principal Agency Agreement, as
amended by an amendment agreement (the “Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement”) dated 18th February,
2009 made among the Bank, the Guarantor, the Trustee, the Agent, the Bank acting through its head office
acting as paying agent in Portugal (the “Portuguese Paying Agent” which expression shall include any
successor Portuguese Paying Agent) and the other paying agents named therein (together with the Agent, the
Portuguese Paying Agent and the other paying agents named in the Principal Agency Agreement, the “Paying
Agents”, which expression shall include any additional or successor paying agents) and of the common



                                                     170
representative appointment agreement dated 3rd November, 2010 such agreement as amended and/or
supplemented and/or restated from time to time (the “Common Representative Appointment Agreement”)
made between the Bank, and Vieira de Almeida & Associados – Sociedade de Advogados R.L., as common
representative of the holders of Interbolsa Notes (representante comum dos obrigacionistas) (the “Common
Representative”).

Interest bearing definitive Notes (unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Final Terms) have interest        A5.5.4.2

coupons (“Coupons”) and, if indicated in the applicable Final Terms, talons for further Coupons (“Talons”)
attached on issue. Any reference herein to Coupons or coupons shall, unless the context otherwise requires,
be deemed to include a reference to Talons or talons. Neither Interbolsa Notes nor global Notes have
Coupons or Talons attached on issue.

The Final Terms for this Note (or the relevant provisions thereof) are set out in Part A of the Final Terms
attached to, endorsed on or incorporated into this Note which supplement these Terms and Conditions and
may specify other terms and conditions which shall, to the extent so specified or to the extent inconsistent
with these Terms and Conditions, replace or modify these Terms and Conditions for the purposes of this
Note. References herein to the “applicable Final Terms” are to Part A of the Final Terms (or the relevant
provisions thereof) attached to, endorsed on or incorporated into this Note.

Any reference to “Noteholders” or “holders” in relation to any Notes shall mean (i) in the case of bearer
Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the holders of the global Notes and definitive Notes and shall, in relation
to any Notes represented by a global Note, be construed as provided below or (ii) in the case of Interbolsa
Notes, each person shown in the book-entry records of a financial institution, which is licensed to act as a
financial intermediary under the Portuguese Securities Code (“Código dos Valores Mobiliários”) (the
“Portuguese Securities Code”) and which is entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of
their customers (and includes any depositary banks appointed by Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg
for the purpose of holding accounts on behalf of Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg) (each such
institution an “Affiliate Member of Interbolsa”), as having an interest in the principal amount of the
Interbolsa Notes. Any reference herein to “Couponholders” shall mean the holders of the Coupons and shall,
unless the context otherwise requires, include the holders of the Talons.

The Trustee acts for the benefit of the holders of the Notes, other than Interbolsa Notes, and for the            A5.4.10

Couponholders, all in accordance with the provisions of the Trust Deed. The holders of Interbolsa Notes
shall at all times be entitled, by means of an Extraordinary Resolution, to appoint and dismiss a Common
Representative to act as their common representative, as further described in Condition 21 (Common
Representative).

As used herein, “Tranche” means Notes which are identical in all respects (including as to listing and
admission to trading) and “Series” means a Tranche of Notes together with any further Tranche or Tranches
of Notes which are (i) expressed to be consolidated and form a single series and (ii) identical in all respects
(including as to listing and admission to trading) except for their respective Issue Dates, Interest
Commencement Dates and/or Issue Prices.

Copies of the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement, the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and the
Common Representative Appointment Agreement are available for inspection at, and a copy of the
applicable Final Terms may be obtained from, the specified office of each of the Trustee (being as at
3rd November, 2010 at One Canada Square, London E14 5AL, the Agent, the Paying Agent whose specified
office is in Luxembourg (in relation to any Notes listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange) and the other
Paying Agents during normal business hours save that, if this Note is neither admitted to trading on a
regulated market in the European Economic Area nor offered in the European Economic Area in
circumstances where a prospectus is required to be published under the Prospectus Directive, the applicable
Final Terms will only be obtainable by a Noteholder holding one or more Notes and such Noteholder must
produce evidence satisfactory to the Bank and the Trustee or, as the case may be, and the relevant Paying
Agent as to its holding of such Notes and identity. In the case of bearer Notes other than Interbola Notes, the
Noteholders, the Couponholders are deemed to have notice of, and are entitled to the benefit of, all the
provisions of the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement and the applicable Final Terms which are
applicable to them. In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the Noteholders are deemed to have notice of, and are


                                                     171
entitled to the benefit of, all the provisions of the Principal Agency Agreement, to the extent amended by the
Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and the applicable Final Terms which are applicable to them.

Words and expressions defined in the Trust Deed or the Principal Agency Agreement or used in the                   A5.4.10

applicable Final Terms shall have the same meanings where used in these Terms and Conditions unless the
context otherwise requires or unless otherwise stated and provided that, in the event of inconsistency
between the Trust Deed and the Principal Agency Agreement, the Principal Agency Agreement will prevail
in respect of Interbolsa Notes and the Trust Deed will prevail in all other cases and, in the event of
inconsistency between the Trust Deed or the Principal Agency Agreement and the applicable Final Terms,
the applicable Final Terms will prevail.

1.     Form, Denomination, Title and Transfer
The Notes other than Interbolsa Notes are in bearer form. Interbolsa Notes are in book-entry form (“forma          A12.4.1.4

escritural”) and can be either registered notes (nominativas) (in which case Interbolsa, at the Bank’s request     A5.4.3

can ask the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for information regarding the identity of the Noteholders and
transmit such information to the Bank) or bearer notes (ao portador) (in which case Interbolsa cannot inform
the Bank of the identity of the Noteholders), as specified in the applicable Final Terms. Definitive Notes shall
be serially numbered, and in the Specified Currency and the Specified Denomination(s). Notes of one
Specified Denomination may not be exchanged for Notes of another Specified Denomination.

This Note is an Undated Deeply Subordinated Note, as indicated in the applicable Final Terms.

This Note may be a Fixed Rate Note, a Floating Rate Note, an Index Linked Interest Note, a Dual Currency
Interest Note or a combination of any of the foregoing, depending upon the Interest Basis shown in the
applicable Final Terms.

Definitive Notes are issued with Coupons attached, and if applicable Talons for further Coupons

Subject as set out below, title to the Notes (except Interbolsa Notes) and Coupons will pass by delivery. The
Bank, the Trustee and any Paying Agent may deem and treat the bearer of any such Note or Coupon as the
absolute owner thereof (whether or not overdue and notwithstanding any notice of ownership or writing
thereon or notice of any previous loss or theft thereof) for all purposes but, in the case of any global Note,
without prejudice to the provisions set out in the next succeeding paragraph.

For so long as any of the Notes is represented by a global Note held on behalf of Euroclear S.A./ N.V.             A5.4.1.3

(“Euroclear”) and/or Clearstream Banking, société anonyme (“Clearstream, Luxembourg”) each person                  A12.4.1.10

(other than Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg) who is for the time being shown in the records of
Euroclear or of Clearstream, Luxembourg as the holder of a particular nominal amount of such Notes (in
which regard any certificate or other document issued by Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg as to the
nominal amount of such Notes standing to the account of any person shall be conclusive and binding for all
purposes save in the case of manifest error) shall be treated by, the Bank, the Trustee and any Paying Agent
as the holder of such nominal amount of such Notes for all purposes other than with respect to the payment
of principal or interest on the Notes, for which purpose the bearer of the relevant global Note shall be treated
by the the Bank, the Trustee and any Paying Agent as the holder of such nominal amount of such Notes in
accordance with and subject to the terms of the relevant global Note and the Trust Deed and the expressions
“Noteholder” and “holder of Notes” and related expressions shall be construed accordingly. Notes which are
represented by a global Note will be transferable only in accordance with the rules and procedures for the
time being of Euroclear or of Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.

References to Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Interbolsa shall, whenever the context so
permits, be deemed to include a reference to any additional or alternative clearing system approved by the
Bank, the Trustee (except in respect of references to Interbolsa), the Common Representative (in respect of
references to Interbolsa only) and the Agent or specified in the applicable Final Terms.




                                                      172
Title to the Interbolsa Notes will be evidenced by book-entries in accordance with the Portuguese Securities      A5.4.1.13

Code and the regulations issued by Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários (Portuguese Securities
Market Commission, the “CMVM”), by Interbolsa or otherwise applicable thereto. Each person shown in               A12.4.1.10

the book-entry records of financial institutions, which are licensed to act as financial intermediaries and
which are entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of their customers and which include
any depository banks appointed by Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg for the purpose of holding
accounts on behalf of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg (each such institution an “Affiliate Member
of Interbolsa’’), as having an interest in the Interbolsa Notes shall be the holder of the principal amount of
the Interbolsa Notes recorded.

Title to the Interbolsa Notes is subject to compliance with all rules, restrictions and requirements applicable
to the activities of Interbolsa.

One or more certificates in relation to the Interbolsa Notes (each, a “Certificate”) will be delivered by the
relevant financial intermediary through which Interbola Notes are held in individual securities accounts in
respect of a registered holding of Interbolsa Notes upon the request by the relevant Noteholder and in
accordance with that financial intermediary’s procedures pursuant to article 78 of the Portuguese Securities
Code.

The Interbolsa Notes will be registered in the relevant control issue account of the Bank with Interbolsa and
will be held in control accounts by each Affiliate Member of Interbolsa on behalf of the Noteholders. Such
control accounts will reflect at all times the aggregate number of Interbolsa Notes held in individual
securities accounts opened with the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa by Noteholders, which are clients of the
Affiliate Members of Interbolsa and include Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.

The person or entity registered in the relevant individual securities accounts of an Affiliate Member of
Interbolsa book-entry registry of the Central de Valores Mobiliários (the “Book-Entry Registry” and each
such entry therein, a “Book Entry”) as the holder of any Interbolsa Note shall (except as otherwise required
by law) be treated as its absolute owner for all purposes (whether or not it is overdue and regardless of any
notice of ownership, trust or any other interest therein).

The Bank and the Paying Agents may (to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law) deem and treat the
person or entity registered in the Book-Entry Registry as the holder of any Interbolsa Note and the absolute
owner for all purposes. Proof of such registration is made by means of a Certificate issued by the relevant
financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual securities accounts pursuant to
article 78 of the Portuguese Securities Code.

No Noteholder will be able to transfer Interbolsa Notes, or any interest therein, except in accordance with
Portuguese law and regulations. Interbolsa Notes may only be transferred in accordance with the applicable
procedures established by the Portuguese Securities Code and the regulations issued by the CMVM and
Interbolsa.

2.    Status of the Notes

(a)   Status and Subordination of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes                                           A5.4.5
      (i)    The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes and any relative Coupons relating thereto constitute           A12.4.1.6
             direct, unsecured and, in accordance with paragraph (iii) below, subordinated obligations of the
             Bank and rank pari passu without any preference among themselves.

      (ii)   The proceeds of the issue of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will be treated for
             regulatory purposes as original own funds (fundos próprios de base) of the Bank. Fundos
             próprios de base (“original own funds” or “Tier 1 Capital”) shall have the meaning given to it
             in Article 5 and 17-A of Aviso do Banco de Portugal n.º 12/92, as amended issued by the Bank
             of Portugal, or otherwise recognised as fundos próprios de base by the Bank of Portugal, or any
             successor supervisory authority.




                                                     173
      (iii)   In the event of bankruptcy or winding up of the Bank the holders of the Undated Deeply
              Subordinated Notes will be entitled to receive payment of the then outstanding nominal amount
              of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes – i.e., of the nominal amount prevailing at the
              relevant time after redenomination(s), if any, applied according to Condition 2(b) (Loss
              Absorption) – plus accrued interest, if any, on such nominal amount from and including the
              Issue Date (if such event occurs in the first Interest Period after the Issue Date) or the preceding
              Interest Payment Date on which interest was either paid or cancelled pursuant to Condition 4(d)
              (Interest Cancellation) (if such event occurs after the first Interest Period), to the extent that
              there are available funds to this effect after payment to the higher ranking creditors of the Bank
              as described below. The claims of the holders of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes and
              the Coupons relating thereto (if any) will, in the event of the bankruptcy or winding up of the
              Bank, be subordinated in right of payment in the manner provided herein, and will:

              A.     be subordinated to the claims of Senior Creditors of the Bank (as defined below). For
                     the purpose of this sub-paragraph (iii), Senior Creditors of the Bank means creditors
                     (1) who are unsubordinated creditors of the Bank; or (2) who are subordinated creditors
                     of the Bank (including the holders of Dated Subordinated Notes and of Undated
                     Subordinated Notes (each as defined in the Trust Deed) and Coupons relating thereto (if
                     any)) other than those whose claims rank, or are expressed to rank, pari passu with or
                     junior to the claims of the holders of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes and the
                     Coupons relating thereto (if any) (whether only in the event of a bankruptcy or winding
                     up of the Bank or otherwise);

              B.     be subordinated to all other responsibilities of the Bank, including any undated
                     subordinated debt of the Bank, to which a higher ranking has been assigned (except for
                     the credits arising from any other guarantee or contractual obligation of the Bank which
                     has expressly been ranked equally or junior to the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes;

              C.     rank equally with the credits arising from the Bank’s preferential shares (if any) and any
                     other obligations of the Bank which are or are expressed to be equally ranking with the
                     Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes and the Coupons relating thereto, if any; and

              D.     rank in priority to any payments in respect of the ordinary share capital of the Bank
                     (including, if any, ordinary shares resulting from conversion of other instruments into
                     ordinary share capital, upon such conversion having occurred) and of any other
                     securities ranking or expressed to rank junior to the Undated Deeply Subordinated
                     Notes, if any.

      In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous proceedings of the Bank, no Noteholder (having
      a debt or a liability towards the Bank) may exercise any set-off or other similar rights against any
      amounts held by the Bank.

      Without prejudice to the foregoing, the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will, in the event of a
      distribution of the assets in the dissolution or liquidation of the Bank, rank senior to the ordinary share
      capital of the Bank and pari passu with the entitlements of holders of preferential shares of the Bank.

(b)   Loss Absorption
      Any amounts which, but for the provisions of Condition 4(d) (Interest Cancellation) or, as the case
      may be, the insolvency of the Bank, would be payable as principal or interest under the Undated
      Deeply Subordinated Notes will be available and may be used to absorb any losses of the Bank, in
      order to allow the Bank to continue its business activities (in accordance with the Regulation of the
      Bank of Portugal 12/92, as amended) as detailed below, further to a decision of the General Meeting
      of Shareholders, the Board of Directors or the Executive Committee of the Bank, as the case may be,
      or a direction received from the Bank of Portugal, taking into account the financial and solvency
      condition of the Bank.




                                                      174
In the above circumstances where unpaid principal and interest may be used to meet the losses of the
Bank, the unpaid nominal amounts of interest first and then principal will be written down and utilised
to the extent that may be necessary to meet the losses of the Bank. The Issuer will notify Interbolsa
of any such reduction and the nominal amount of each Undated Deeply Subordinated Note will be
reduced in the records of Interbolsa accordingly.

The reduction in the nominal amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes may take place
whenever the Bank is at risk of noncompliance with the Own Funds Requirements Regulations, at an
individual or consolidated level as appropriate, in the opinion of either the Bank or the Bank of
Portugal taking into account the most recently available reports from the Bank of Portugal regarding
the Bank’s compliance with the Own Funds Requirements Regulations and all subsequent available
information. Such reduction will be effected proportionally between the nominal amount of the
Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes, instruments also eligible as Tier 1 Capital subject to limits
ranking pari passu therewith and the shareholders’ capital (equity items attributable to shareholders
including share capital and respective share premiums, reserves and other retained earnings, profit and
losses and other comprehensive income) of the Bank on a pro rata basis. Notwithstanding any other
provision, the nominal amount of each Undated Deeply Subordinated Note shall never be reduced to
an amount lower than euro 0.01.

In these Terms and Conditions, “Regulatory Capital” means the capital required to allow the Bank to
comply with the capitalization requirements at any time applicable to credit institutions in Portugal,
and calculated in accordance with Regulation of the Bank of Portugal 12/92, as amended.

Subject to prior approval of the Bank of Portugal, the nominal amount of the Undated Deeply
Subordinated Notes so reduced can only be reinstated and registered as a subordinated credit as if it
had never been reduced to the extent that the Bank’s Regulatory Capital registers a positive variation
resulting from an improvement in the Bank’s financial condition as a consequence of gains obtained
in the course of the Bank’s activities, such reinstatement being made proportionally between the
outstanding nominal amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes, and other instruments also
eligible as Tier 1 Capital subject to limits ranking pari passu therewith and the shareholders’ capital
on a pro rata basis. In the above cases and at all times, the reinstated amounts previously written down
will revert to being treated as subordinated credits of the corresponding holders with the same level
of subordination as before being written down.

Without prejudice to the following paragraph, in the determination of the proportional amount to
allocate to the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes, the losses (being the negative variation in the
Regulatory Capital ratio resulting from a deterioration of the Bank’s financial condition as a
consequence of losses incurred in the course of the Bank’s activities) or the gains (being the positive
variation in the Regulatory Capital ratio resulting from an improvement of the Bank’s financial
condition as a consequence of gains obtained in the course of the Bank’s activities), as the case may
be, will be multiplied by the quotient of (i) the nominal amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated
Notes and (ii) the sum of this nominal amount with the then existing nominal amount of other undated
deeply subordinated notes, other instruments also eligible as Tier 1 Capital subject to limits and
shareholders’ capital. The determination of the proportional amount is based in individual or
consolidated level, as appropriate and is determined at the discretion of the Bank or the Bank of
Portugal, as the case may be, such determination being final, binding and conclusive.

The reinstatement of the previously reduced nominal amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated
Notes shall be made taking into account the existing elements that count for the denominator of the
quotient referred to above immediately prior to such reinstatement, regardless of the fact that such
elements at the time of the reduction could have been of a different amount.

During any period of writing down of the nominal amount of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes
pursuant to Condition 2(b) (Loss Absorption) and until such nominal amount has been reinstated in
full and registered as a subordinated credit as if it had never been written down, the written down
nominal amount of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes shall not bear interest.



                                              175
      Whenever the nominal amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes is written down and/or
      reinstated in accordance with the provisions above (and, for the avoidance of doubt, this mechanism
      may be applied by the Bank as many times as it may be deemed necessary, subject only to the limit
      of euro 0.001 per Undated Deeply Subordinated Note) the Bank will publish, or cause to be published,
      notices informing the holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes of such write down or
      reinstatement in accordance with the provision of Condition 13 (Notices).

3.    Negative Pledge
There is no negative pledge in respect of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes.

4.    Interest and Interest Cancellation
Payments of interest on the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will occur in accordance with the
provisions of this Condition 4 (Interest and Interest Cancellation) and will be subject to a discretionary
decision of the Board of Directors or the Executive Committee of the Bank, as the case may be, as specified
in paragraph (d) below (Interest Cancellation), without prejudice to the provisions of subparagraphs (d) (ii)
(second paragraph) (No Obligation to Pay Interest) and (iii) (Priority of Interest) below. If the Board of
Directors or the Executive Committee of the Bank, as the case may be, decides not to make an interest
payment on any Interest Payment Date, the amount of such interest payment will not be due, and will be             A5.4.7

forfeited in accordance with subparagraph (d) of this Condition 4 (Interest and Interest Cancellation).

(a)   Interest on Fixed Rate Notes
      Subject to the provisions of Condition 4(d) (Interest Cancellation), each Fixed Rate Note bears
      interest from (and including) the Interest Commencement Date at the rate(s) per annum equal to the
      Rate(s) of Interest. Subject to the provisions of Condition 4(d) (Interest Cancellation), interest will be
      payable in arrear on the Interest Payment Date(s) in each year. For so long as any of the Fixed Rate
      Notes is represented by a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear,
      interest will be paid to Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear for distribution by them to entitled
      accountholders in accordance with their usual rules and operating procedures. Interest on Fixed Rate
      Notes which are Interbolsa Notes will be paid to the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for distribution
      by them to the accounts of entitled Noteholders in accordance with Interbolsa’s usual rules and
      operating procedures.

      If the Notes are in definitive form, except as provided in the applicable Final Terms, the amount of
      interest payable on each Interest Payment Date in respect of the Fixed Interest Period ending on (but
      excluding) such date will amount to the Fixed Coupon Amount. Payments of interest on any Interest
      Payment Date will, if so specified in the applicable Final Terms, amount to the Broken Amount so
      specified.

      As used in these Terms and Conditions, “Fixed Interest Period” means the period from (and including)
      an Interest Payment Date (or the Interest Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the next (or first)
      Interest Payment Date.

      Except in the case of Notes in definitive form where an applicable Fixed Coupon Amount or Broken
      Amount is specified in the applicable Final Terms, interest shall be calculated in respect of any period
      by applying the Rate of Interest to:

      (A)    in the case of Fixed Rate Notes which are either Interbolsa Notes or are represented by a global
             Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, the full nominal amount
             outstanding of the Fixed Rate Notes; or

      (B)    in the case of Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form, the Calculation Amount; and, in each case,
             multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction, and rounding the resultant figure
             to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any such sub-unit being
             rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market convention. Where the
             Specified Denomination of a Fixed Rate Note in definitive form is a multiple of the Calculation


                                                     176
             Amount, the amount of interest payable in respect of such Fixed Rate Note shall be the product
             of the amount (determined in the manner provided above) for the Calculation Amount and the
             amount by which the Calculation Amount is multiplied to reach the Specified Denomination,
             without any further rounding.

      “Day Count Fraction” means, in respect of the calculation of an amount of interest in accordance with
      this Condition 4(a) (Interest on Fixed Rate Notes):

      (i)    if “Actual/Actual (ICMA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms:

             (A)   in the case of Notes where the number of days in the relevant period from (and
                   including) the most recent Interest Payment Date (or, if none, the Interest
                   Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the relevant payment date (the “Accrual
                   Period”) is equal to or shorter than the Determination Period during which the Accrual
                   Period ends, the number of days in such Accrual Period divided by the product of (1) the
                   number of days in such Determination Period and (2) the number of Determination
                   Dates (as specified in the applicable Final Terms) that would occur in one calendar year;
                   or

             (B)   in the case of Notes where the Accrual Period is longer than the Determination Period
                   during which the Accrual Period ends, the sum of:

                   (1)    the number of days in such Accrual Period falling in the Determination Period in
                          which the Accrual Period begins divided by the product of (x) the number of days
                          in such Determination Period and (y) the number of Determination Dates (as
                          specified in the applicable Final Terms) that would occur in one calendar year;
                          and

                   (2)    the number of days in such Accrual Period falling in the next Determination
                          Period divided by the product of (x) the number of days in such Determination
                          Period and (y) the number of Determination Dates that would occur in one
                          calendar year; and

      (ii)   if “30/360” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number of days in the period from
             (and including) the most recent Interest Payment Date (or, if none, the Interest Commencement
             Date) to (but excluding) the relevant payment date (such number of days being calculated on
             the basis of a year of 360 days with 12 30-day months) divided by 360.

      In these Terms and Conditions:

      “Determination Period” means the period from (and including) a Determination Date to (but
      excluding) the next Determination Date (including, where either the Interest Commencement Date or
      the final Interest Payment Date is not a Determination Date, the period commencing on the first
      Determination Date prior to, and ending on the first Determination Date falling after, such date); and

      “sub-unit” means, with respect to any currency other than euro, the lowest amount of such currency
      that is available as legal tender in the country of such currency and, with respect to euro, means one
      cent.

(b)   Interest on Floating Rate Notes and Index Linked Interest Notes

      (i)    Interest Payment Dates
             Subject to the provisions of Condition 4(d) (Interest Cancellation), each Floating Rate Note
             and Index Linked Interest Note bears interest from (and including) the Interest Commencement
             Date and such interest will be payable in arrear on either:

             (A)   the Specified Interest Payment Date(s) in each year specified in the applicable Final
                   Terms; or



                                                   177
(B)   if no Specified Interest Payment Date(s) is/are specified in the applicable Final Terms,
      each date (each such date, together with each Specified Interest Payment Date, an
      “Interest Payment Date”) which falls on the number of months or other period specified
      as the Specified Period in the applicable Final Terms after the preceding Interest
      Payment Date or, in the case of the first Interest Payment Date, after the Interest
      Commencement Date. Such interest will be payable in respect of each Interest Period
      (which expression shall, in these Terms and Conditions, mean the period from (and
      including) an Interest Payment Date (or the Interest Commencement Date) to (but
      excluding) the next (or first) Interest Payment Date). For so long as any of the Floating
      Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes is represented by a global Note held on behalf
      of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, interest will be paid to Clearstream,
      Luxembourg and Euroclear for distribution by them to entitled accountholders in
      accordance with their usual rules and operating procedures. Interest on Floating Rate
      Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes which are Interbolsa Notes will be paid to the
      Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for distribution by them to the accounts of entitled
      Noteholders in accordance with Interbolsa’s usual rules and operating procedures.

If a Business Day Convention is specified in the applicable Final Terms and (x) there is no
numerically corresponding day in the calendar month on which an Interest Payment Date
should occur or (y) if any Interest Payment Date would otherwise fall on a day which is not a
Business Day, then, if the Business Day Convention specified is:

(1)   in any case where Specified Periods are specified in accordance with Condition
      4(b)(i)(B), the Floating Rate Convention, such Interest Payment Date (i) in the case of
      (x) above, shall be the last day that is a Business Day in the relevant month and the
      provisions of (B) below shall apply mutatis mutandis or (ii) in the case of (y) above,
      shall be postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would thereby fall
      into the next calendar month, in which event (A) such Interest Payment Date shall be
      brought forward to the immediately preceding Business Day and (B) each subsequent
      Interest Payment Date shall be the last Business Day in the month which falls the
      Specified Period after the preceding applicable Interest Payment Date occurred; or

(2)   the Following Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be postponed
      to the next day which is a Business Day; or

(3)   the Modified Following Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be
      postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would thereby fall into the
      next calendar month, in which event such Interest Payment Date shall be brought
      forward to the immediately preceding Business Day; or

(4)   the Preceding Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be brought
      forward to the immediately preceding Business Day.

In these Terms and Conditions, “Business Day” means a day which is both:

(A)   a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are
      open for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency
      deposits) in Lisbon in the case of Interbolsa Notes and any Additional Business Centre
      specified in the applicable Final Terms; and

(B)   either (1) in relation to any sum payable in a Specified Currency other than euro, a day
      on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are open
      for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency
      deposits) in the principal financial centre of the country of the relevant Specified
      Currency (which if the Specified Currency is Australian dollars or New Zealand dollars,
      shall be Sydney and Auckland, respectively), or (2) in relation to any sum payable in




                                      178
             euro, a day on which the Trans-European Automated Real-Time Gross Settlement
             Express Transfer (TARGET2) System (the “TARGET2 System”) is open.

       Interest will be paid subject to and in accordance with the provisions of Condition 5
       (Payments).

(ii)   Rate of Interest
       The Rate of Interest payable from time to time in respect of Floating Rate Notes and Index
       Linked Interest Notes will be determined in the manner specified in the applicable Final Terms.

       (A)   ISDA Determination for Floating Rate Notes where ISDA Determination is specified in
             the applicable Final Terms as the manner in which the Rate of Interest is to be
             determined, the Rate of Interest for each Interest Period will be the relevant ISDA Rate
             plus or minus (as indicated in the applicable Final Terms) the Margin (if any). For the
             purposes of this sub- paragraph (A), “ISDA Rate” for an Interest Period means a rate
             equal to the Floating Rate that would be determined by the Agent or other person
             specified in the applicable Final Terms under an interest rate swap transaction if the
             Agent or that other person were acting as Calculation Agent for that swap transaction
             under the terms of an agreement incorporating the 2006 ISDA Definitions (as published
             by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. and amended and updated
             as at the Issue Date of the first Tranche of Notes and as published by the International
             Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. (the “ISDA Definitions”)) and under which:

             (1)    the Floating Rate Option is as specified in the applicable Final Terms;

             (2)    the Designated Maturity (if any) is a period specified in the applicable Final
                    Terms; and

             (3)    the relevant Reset Date is either (i) if the applicable Floating Rate Option is based
                    on the London inter-bank offered rate (“LIBOR”) or on the Euro-zone inter-bank
                    offered rate (“EURIBOR”) for a currency, the first day of that Interest Period or
                    (ii) in any other case, as specified in the applicable Final Terms.

             For the purposes of this sub-paragraph (A), “Euro-zone”, “Floating Rate”, “Calculation
             Agent”, “Floating Rate Option”, and “Reset Date” have the meanings given to those
             terms in the ISDA Definitions.

             Unless otherwise stated in the applicable Final Terms the Minimum Rate of Interest
             shall be deemed to be zero.

             When this sub-paragraph (A) applies, in respect of each relevant Interest Period the
             Agent will be deemed to have discharged its obligations under Condition 4(b)(ii) in
             respect of the determination of the Interest Rate if it has determined the Rate of Interest
             in respect of such Interest Period in the manner provided in this sub-paragraph (A).

       (B)   Screen Rate Determination for Floating Rate Notes Where Screen Rate Determination
             is specified in the applicable Final Terms as the manner in which the Rate of Interest is
             to be determined, the Rate of Interest for each Interest Period will, subject as provided
             below, be either:

             (1)    the offered quotation; or

             (2)    the arithmetic mean (rounded if necessary to the fifth decimal place, with
                    0.000005 being rounded upwards) of the offered quotations, (expressed as a
                    percentage rate per annum) for the Reference Rate which appears or appear, as
                    the case may be, on the Relevant Screen Page as at 11.00 a.m. (London time, in
                    the case of LIBOR, or Brussels time, in the case of EURIBOR) on the Interest
                    Determination Date in question plus or minus (as indicated in the applicable Final


                                                179
                     Terms) the Margin (if any), all as determined by the Agent. If five or more of such
                     offered quotations are available on the Relevant Screen Page, the highest (or, if
                     there is more than one such highest quotation, one only of such quotations) and
                     the lowest (or, if there is more than one such lowest quotation, one only of such
                     quotations) shall be disregarded by the Agent for the purpose of determining the
                     arithmetic mean (rounded as provided above) of such offered quotations.

                     The Principal Agency Agreement contains provisions for determining the Rate of
                     Interest in the event that the Relevant Screen Page is not available or if, in the case
                     of (1) above, no such quotation appears or, in the case of (2) above, fewer than
                     three such offered quotations appear, in each case as at the time specified in the
                     preceding paragraph.

                     If the Reference Rate from time to time in respect of Floating Rate Notes is
                     specified in the applicable Final Terms as being other than LIBOR or EURIBOR,
                     the Rate of Interest in respect of such Notes will be determined as provided in the
                     applicable Final Terms.

(iii)   Minimum Rate of Interest and/or Maximum Rate of Interest
        If the applicable Final Terms specifies a Minimum Rate of Interest for any Interest Period, then,
        in the event that the Rate of Interest in respect of such Interest Period determined in accordance
        with the provisions of paragraph (ii) above is less than such Minimum Rate of Interest, the Rate
        of Interest for such Interest Period shall be such Minimum Rate of Interest.

        If the applicable Final Terms specifies a Maximum Rate of Interest for any Interest Period,
        then, in the event that the Rate of Interest in respect of such Interest Period determined in
        accordance with the provisions of paragraph (ii) above is greater than such Maximum Rate of
        Interest, the Rate of Interest for such Interest Period shall be such Maximum Rate of Interest.

(iv)    Determination of Rate of Interest and Calculation of Interest Amounts                                  A5.4.7

        The Agent, in the case of Floating Rate Notes, and the Calculation Agent, in the case of Index
        Linked Interest Notes, will at or as soon as practicable after each time at which the Rate of
        Interest is to be determined, determine the Rate of Interest for the relevant Interest Period. In
        the case of Index Linked Interest Notes, the Calculation Agent will notify the Agent of the Rate
        of Interest for the relevant Interest Period as soon as practicable after calculating the same.

        The Agent will calculate the amount of interest (the “Interest Amount”) payable on the Floating
        Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes for the relevant Interest Period by applying the Rate
        of Interest to:

        (A)   in the case of Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes which are either
              Interbolsa Notes or are represented by a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream,
              Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, the full nominal amount outstanding of the relevant
              Notes; or

        (B)    in the case of Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes in definitive form, the
               Calculation Amount;

        and, in each case, multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction and rounding
        the resultant figure to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any such
        sub-unit being rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market convention.
        Where the Specified Denomination of a Floating Rate Note or an Index Linked Interest Note
        in definitive form is a multiple of the Calculation Amount, the Interest Amount payable in
        respect of such Note shall be the product of the amount (determined in the manner provided
        above) for the Calculation Amount and the amount by which the Calculation Amount is
        multiplied to reach the Specified Denomination, without any further rounding.



                                                180
“Day Count Fraction” means, in respect of the calculation of an amount of interest for any
Interest Period:

(i)     if “Actual/Actual” or “Actual/Actual (ISDA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms,
        the actual number of days in the Interest Period divided by 365 (or, if any portion of that
        Interest Period falls in a leap year, the sum of (A) the actual number of days in that
        portion of the Interest Period falling in a leap year divided by 366 and (B) the actual
        number of days in that portion of the Interest Period falling in a non-leap year divided
        by 365);

(ii)    if “Actual/365 (Fixed)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number of
        days in the Interest Period divided by 365;

(iii)   if “Actual/365 (Sterling)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number
        of days in the Interest Period divided by 365 or, in the case of an Interest Payment Date
        falling in a leap year, 366;

(iv)    if “Actual/360” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number of days in
        the Interest Period divided by 360;

(v)     if “30/360”, “360/360” or “Bond Basis” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the
        number of days in the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis as
        follows:

                          [360 ǂ (Y2 – Y1)] + [30 ǂ (M2 – M1)]+ (D2 – D1)
Day Count Fraction =
                                                  360

where:

“Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period falls;

“Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the last day
of the Interest Period falls;

“M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period
falls;

“M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following
the last day of the Interest Period falls;

“D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless such number
is 31, in which case D1 will be 30; and

“D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day included
in the Interest Period, unless such number would be 31 and D1 is greater than 29, in which case
D2 will be 30;

(vi)    if “30E/360” or “Eurobond Basis” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number
        of days in the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis as follows:

                          [360 ǂ (Y2 – Y1)] + [30 ǂ (M2 – M1)]+ (D2 – D1)
Day Count Fraction =
                                                  360

where:

“Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period falls;

“Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the last day
of the Interest Period falls;


                                         181
      “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period
      falls;

      “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following
      the last day of the Interest Period falls;

      “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless such number
      would be 31, in which case D1 will be 30; and

      “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day included
      in the Interest Period, unless such number would be 31, in which case D2 will be 30;

      (vii) if “30E/360 (ISDA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number of days in
            the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis as follows:

                               [360 ǂ (Y2 – Y1)] + [30 ǂ (M2 – M1)]+ (D2 – D1)
      Day Count Fraction =
                                                       360

      where:

      “Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period falls;

      “Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the last day
      of the Interest Period falls;

      “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period
      falls;

      “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following
      the last day of the Interest Period falls;

      “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless (i) that day
      is the last day of February or (ii) such number would be 31, in which case D1 will be 30; and

      “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day included
      in the Interest Period, unless (i) that day is the last day of February but not the Maturity Date
      or (ii) such number would be 31, in which case D2 will be 30.

(v)   Notification of Rate of Interest and Interest Amounts
      Subject to the provisions of Condition 4(d) (Interest Cancellation), the Agent will cause the
      Rate of Interest and each Interest Amount for each Interest Period and the relevant Interest
      Payment Date to be notified to the Bank, the other Paying Agents and any stock exchange or
      other relevant authority on which the relevant Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest
      Notes are for the time being listed (by no later than the first day of each Interest Period) or by
      which they have been admitted to listing and notice thereof to be published in accordance with
      Condition 13 (Notices) as soon as possible after their determination but in no event later than
      the fourth London Business Day thereafter. Each Interest Amount and Interest Payment Date
      so notified may subsequently be amended (or appropriate alternative arrangements made by
      way of adjustment) without prior notice in the event of an extension or shortening of the
      Interest Period. Any such amendment will be promptly notified to each stock exchange or other
      relevant authority on which the relevant Floating Rate Notes or Index Linked Interest Notes are
      for the time being listed or by which they have been admitted to listing and to the Noteholders
      in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices). “London Business Day” means a day (other than a
      Saturday or a Sunday) on which banks and foreign exchange markets are open for business in
      London.




                                              182
      (vi)    Determination or calculation by Trustee or by a designated bank
              If for any reason the Agent at any time after the Issue Date defaults in its obligation to
              determine the Rate of Interest or calculate any Interest Amount in accordance with
              subparagraph (ii) above, then (A) (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes), the Trustee or (B) (in
              respect of Interbolsa Notes), any bank designated by the Common Representative for such
              purpose or, if no such bank is designated, a meeting of the Noteholders by Extraordinary
              Resolution, shall determine the Rate of Interest at such rate as, in its absolute discretion (having
              such regard as it shall think fit to the foregoing provisions of this Condition but subject always
              to any Minimum Rate of Interest and/or Maximum Rate of Interest specified in the applicable
              Final Terms) it shall deem fair and reasonable in all the circumstances or, as the case may be,
              the Trustee, designated bank or meeting of holders of Interbolsa Notes, as the case may be,
              shall calculate the Interest Amount(s) in such manner as it shall deem fair and reasonable in all
              the circumstances and each such determination or calculation shall be deemed to have been
              made by the Agent.

      (vii)   Certificates to be Final
              All certificates, communications, opinions, determinations, calculations, quotations and
              decisions given, expressed, made or obtained for the purposes of the provisions of this
              Condition 4(b) (Interest on Floating Rate Notes and Index Linked Interest Notes), whether by
              the Agent or (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee, or (in the case of Interbolsa
              Notes), by or on behalf of the Common Representative or, if applicable, the Calculation Agent,
              shall (in the absence of negligence, wilful default, bad faith or manifest error) be binding on
              the Bank, the Agent, the Trustee, the Common Representative the Calculation Agent (if
              applicable), the other Paying Agents and all Noteholders and Couponholders and (in the
              absence as aforesaid) no liability to the Bank, the Noteholders or the Couponholders shall
              attach to the Agent or the Trustee or the Common Representative or the Calculation Agent (if
              applicable) in connection with the exercise or non-exercise by it of its powers, duties and
              discretions pursuant to such provisions.

(c)   Interest on Dual Currency Interest Notes
      In the case of Dual Currency Notes, if the rate or amount of interest falls to be determined by reference
      to an exchange rate, the rate or amount of interest payable shall be determined in the manner specified
      in the applicable Final Terms.

(d)   Interest Cancellation
      The payment of interest is conditional upon, and dependent upon, a discretionary decision of the
      Bank, without prejudice to the provisions of subparagraph 4(d)(ii) (second paragraph) (No Obligation
      to Pay Interest) and 4(d)(iii) (Priority of Interest) below. The Board of Directors or the Executive
      Committee of the Bank, as the case may be, may in its discretion decide on the payment of interest,
      provided that no Interest Cancellation Event has occurred or is continuing on the relevant Interest
      Payment Date.

      Subject to a decision to pay interest being taken by the Board of Directors or the Executive Committee
      of the Bank, as the case may be, and to the absence of an Interest Cancellation Event, interest shall be
      payable on the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
      applicable Final Terms.

      (i)     Interest Cancellation Event
              The Bank will in any case be prevented from making any interest payments, and interest shall
              not accrue or otherwise become due and payable to the relevant holders on the relevant Interest
              Payment Date, regardless of a decision to that effect being taken by the Board of Directors or
              the Executive Committee of the Bank, as the case may be:




                                                      183
       (a)    to the extent the sum of such envisaged interest payment and (i) the amount of dividends
              paid, decided or pending payment on the Bank's ordinary share capital or the amount of
              payments paid, decided or pending on the instruments mentioned in Condition
              2(a)(iii)(D) and (ii) the amount of dividends relating to preferential shares of the Bank
              and the amount of other payments under obligations referred to in Condition 2(a)(iii)(C)
              which rank equally with the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes in terms of their
              entitlement to the profits of the Bank, in each case which have already been paid in the
              then current fiscal year, exceed the Bank’s Distributable Funds with reference to the
              most recently available reports from the Bank of Portugal regarding the Bank’s
              compliance with the Own Funds Requirements Regulation and all subsequent available
              information; or

       (b)    if notwithstanding the fact that the sum mentioned in a) above does not exceed the
              Bank’s Distributable Funds, the Bank is in violation of the Own Funds Requirements
              Regulation, or to the extent that such payment would cause a breach by the Bank of the
              Own Funds Requirements Regulation taking into account the most recently available
              reports from the Bank of Portugal regarding the Bank’s compliance with the Own Funds
              Requirements Regulation and all subsequent available information; or

       (c)    if, other than in the circumstances mentioned in a) and b) above, (i) the Executive
              Committee of the Bank, or (ii) the Bank of Portugal, are of the opinion that such
              payment may compromise compliance by the Bank with the Own Funds Requirements
              Regulation, taking into consideration the (past and expected) evolution of the financial
              situation of the Bank and the most recently available reports from the Bank of Portugal
              regarding the Bank’s compliance with the Own Funds Requirements Regulation and all
              subsequent available information; or

       (d)    if the nominal amount of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes has been reduced
              pursuant to Condition 2(b) (Loss Absorption) and such nominal amount has not been
              reinstated in full and registered as a subordinated credit has if it had never been reduced.

       (each of the above events, an “Interest Cancellation Event”).

       “Distributable Funds” means, for the purposes hereof, and in respect of any fiscal year of the
       Bank, calculated by reference to the last day of the immediately preceding fiscal year, the sum
       of earned profits held and any other reserves and amounts capable of distribution to the
       shareholders of the Bank in accordance with Portuguese law, plus or less, as the case may be,
       the amount of any profits or losses arising on such preceding fiscal year, in any case net of (i)
       the amounts necessary to set up or reinstate any reserves which are mandatory pursuant to a
       legal or statutory requirement; and (ii) the amount which is to be statutorily applied by the
       Bank in making distributions to the Bank’s employees and directors, but in any case prior to
       the deduction of the payment of any dividends or other payments in respect of the ordinary
       shares of the Bank or any other securities which are subordinated to the Undated Deeply
       Subordinated Notes, in respect of such fiscal year.

       “Own Funds Requirements Regulations” means, at any given time, all regulations,
       requirements, directions and policies then in force relating to own funds requirements, issued
       by the Bank of Portugal or applicable to credit institutions in Portugal, including any such
       regulations, requirements, directions and policies as may be applicable in the future specifically
       to the Bank.

(ii)   No Obligation to Pay Interest
       In the event that:
       (1)    no interest is paid on an Interest Payment Date or part of the interest that may otherwise
              have been due is not paid, in either case due to the occurrence of an Interest Cancellation
              Event; or


                                               184
              (2)    (subject as provided below in Condition 4(d)(iii) (“Priority of Interest”)) the Board of
                     Directors or the Executive Committee of the Bank, as the case may be, does not decide
                     to make an interest payment on an Interest Payment Date,

              the relevant interest amounts will not accrue or become due and payable, and shall be forfeited
              and the holders of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will not be entitled to claim any
              payments in respect of interest relating to the Interest Period ending on such Interest Payment
              Date.

              Notwithstanding payment of interest being conditional upon a discretionary decision of the
              Bank, in the absence of an Interest Cancellation Event the distribution of any revenues or
              dividends to the holders of any ordinary shares issued by the Bank in a given Interest Period,
              shall necessarily determine the payment of interest on the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes
              on the following Interest Payment Date, in accordance with Condition 4 (“Interest and Interest
              Cancellation”). To this effect and prior to the distribution of such dividends or revenues, the
              Bank will set aside enough monies for payment of such interest amounts which will become
              due under the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes subsequently to such distribution or
              payment, provided that such amounts set aside remain available to meet losses of the Bank and,
              as such, will not be distributable to the holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes if an
              Interest Cancellation Event has occurred and is continuing.

              If other than in the circumstances described in subparagraphs a) to d) of Condition 4 (d)(i)
              (Interest Cancellation Event) either the Board of Directors or the Executive Committee of the
              Bank, as the case may be, decides in its discretion not to pay interest to the holders of Undated
              Deeply Subordinated Notes on a given Interest Payment Date, and no Interest Cancellation
              Event has occurred or is continuing on such Interest Payment Date, then the Bank’s Board of
              Directors undertakes not to propose the distribution of revenues or dividends to the holders of
              any ordinary shares of the Bank in such Interest Period in which the discretionary nonpayment
              of interest to the holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes took place.

      (iii)   Priority of Interest
              The Bank undertakes that, prior to the distribution of any revenues (including dividends to its
              shareholders), the amortisation or acquisition of own shares or other securities subordinated to
              the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes and after the approval of such payments by the Bank’s
              General Meeting of Shareholders, Board of Directors or Executive Committee, as the case may
              be, (or, where such approval has not yet occurred, such payments have been formally
              proposed), the Bank will, in any circumstances, regardless of a decision of the Bank’s Board
              of Directors or Executive Committee, as the case may be, being taken to that effect, set aside
              enough monies for the payment of interest amounts which will (assuming there will be no
              Interest Cancellation Event on the relevant Interest Payment Date and on the basis that the
              relevant interest payment will be made on the relevant Interest Payment Date) become due on
              the next Interest Payment Date, provided that such amounts set aside remain available to meet
              losses of the Bank and, as such, will not be distributable to the holders of Undated Deeply
              Subordinated Notes if an Interest Cancellation Event has occurred or is continuing. In any case,
              no payment of interest will be made in violation of the Interest Cancellation Events provisions.

(e)   Accrual of Interest
      Without prejudice to the provisions of Condition 4 (d) (Interest Cancellation) above, each Undated
      Deeply Subordinated Note (or in the case of the redemption of part only of an Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Note, that part only of such Undated Deeply Subordinated Note) will cease to bear
      interest (if any) from the date scheduled for its redemption unless payment of principal is improperly
      withheld or refused. In such event interest will continue to accrue until due payment in accordance
      with the relevant provisions of the applicable Final Terms.




                                                     185
5.    Payments                                                                                                     A12.4.1.2

Any payments made to the holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will be subject to the limitations
established in these Terms and Conditions and the Bank will notify, or will cause the notification, of the
holders of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes of any such payments, as it may deem appropriate, and in
accordance with Condition 13 (Notices) below.

(a)   Method of Payment
      Subject as provided below:

      (i)    payments in a Specified Currency other than euro will be made by transfer to an account in the
             relevant Specified Currency maintained by the payee with a bank in the principal financial
             centre of the country of such Specified Currency (which, if the Specified Currency is Australian
             dollars or New Zealand dollars, shall be Sydney and Auckland, respectively); and

      (ii)   payments in euro will be made by credit or transfer to a euro account (or any other account to
             which euro may be credited or transferred) specified by the payee.

      Payments will be subject in all cases to any fiscal or other laws and regulations applicable thereto in
      the place of payment, but without prejudice to the provisions of Condition 7 (Taxation).

(b)   Presentation of definitive Notes, Receipts and Coupons
      Payments of principal in respect of definitive Notes will (subject as provided below) be made in the
      manner provided in paragraph (a) above only against surrender of definitive Notes, and payments of
      interest in respect of definitive Notes will (subject as provided below) be made as aforesaid only
      against surrender of Coupons, in each case at the specified office of any Paying Agent outside the
      United States (which expression, as used herein, means the United States of America (including the
      States and the District of Columbia and its territories and its possessions and other areas subject to its
      jurisdiction)).

      Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form (other than Dual Currency Notes or Index Linked Notes) should
      be presented for payment together with all unmatured Coupons appertaining thereto (which
      expression shall for this purpose include Coupons falling to be issued on exchange of matured
      Talons), failing which the amount of any missing unmatured Coupon (or, in the case of payment not
      being made in full, the same proportion of the amount of such missing unmatured Coupon as the sum
      so paid bears to the sum due) will be deducted from the sum due for payment. Each amount of
      principal so deducted will be paid in the manner mentioned above against surrender of the relative
      missing Coupon at any time before the expiry of 10 years after the Relevant Date (as defined in
      Condition 7 (Taxation)) in respect of such principal (whether or not such Coupon would otherwise
      have become void under Condition 8 (Prescription)) or, if later, five years from the date on which such
      Coupon would otherwise have become due, but in no event thereafter.

      Upon the date on which any Floating Rate Note, Dual Currency Note or Index Linked Note in
      definitive form becomes due and repayable, unmatured Coupons and Talons (if any) relating thereto
      (whether or not attached) shall become void and no payment or, as the case may be, exchange for
      further Coupons shall be made in respect thereof.

      If the due date for redemption of any definitive Note is not an Interest Payment Date, interest (if any)
      in respect of such Note shall be payable only against surrender of the relevant definitive Note.

(c)   Payments in respect of global Notes
      Payments of principal and interest (if any) in respect of Notes represented by any global Note will
      (subject as provided below) be made in the manner specified above in relation to definitive Notes or
      otherwise in the manner specified in the relevant global Notes where applicable against presentation
      or surrender, as the case may be, of such global Note if the global Note is not issued in new global
      note form, at the specified office of any Paying Agent outside the United States. A record of each
      payment made, distinguishing between any payment of principal and any payment of interest, will be


                                                     186
      made on such global Note either by the Paying Agent to which it was presented or in the records of
      Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg, as applicable.

      The holder of a global Note (or, as provided in the Trust Deed, the Trustee) shall be the only person
      entitled to receive payments in respect of Notes represented by such global Note and the Bank will be
      discharged by payment to, or to the order of, the holder of such global Note (or, as provided in the
      Trust Deed, the Trustee) in respect of each amount so paid. Each of the persons shown in the records
      of Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg as the beneficial holder of a particular nominal amount of
      Notes represented by such global Note must look solely to Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as
      the case may be, for his share of each payment so made by the Bank to, or to the order of, the holder
      of such global Note (or, as provided in the Trust Deed, the Trustee).

(d)   Payments in respect of Interbolsa Notes
      All payments on Interbolsa Notes (including without limitation the payment of accrued interest and
      principal) will be made by the Bank to the Portuguese Paying Agent and (i) if made in euro will be
      (a) credited, according to the procedures and regulations of Interbolsa, by the Portuguese Paying
      Agent to the payment current-accounts held in the payment system of the Bank of Portugal by the
      Affiliate Members of Interbolsa whose control accounts with Interbolsa are credited with such Notes
      and thereafter (b) credited by such Interbolsa Affiliate Members from the aforementioned payment
      current-accounts to the accounts of the Noteholders or through Euroclear and Clearstream,
      Luxembourg to the accounts with Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners
      of those Notes, in accordance with the rules and procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream,
      Luxembourg, as the case may be; (ii) if made in currencies other than euro will be (a) transferred,
      on the payment date and according to the procedures and regulations applicable by Interbolsa, from
      the account held by the Portuguese Paying Agent in the Foreign Currency Settlement System (Sistema
      de Liquidação em Moeda Estrangeira), managed by Caixa Geral de Depósitos, S.A., to the relevant
      accounts of the relevant Affiliate Members of Interbolsa, and thereafter (b) transferred by such
      Affiliate Members of Interbolsa from such relevant accounts to the accounts of the Noteholders of
      those Notes or through Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to the accounts with Euroclear and
      Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners of those Notes, in accordance with the rules and
      procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.

      The Bank must provide Interbolsa with a prior notice of all payments in relation to the Interbolsa
      Notes and all necessary information for that purpose. In particular, such notice must contain:

      (a)    the identity of the Portuguese Paying Agent responsible for the relevant payment; and

      (b)    a statement of acceptance of such responsibility by the Portuguese Paying Agent.

      Interbolsa shall notify the Portuguese Paying Agent of the amounts to be settled, which Interbolsa
      calculates on the basis of the balances and on the tax rules governing the accounts of the Affiliate
      Members of Interbolsa.

      In the case of a partial payment, the amount held in the relevant current account of the Portuguese
      Paying Agent must be apportioned pro-rata between the accounts of the Affiliate Members of
      Interbolsa. After a payment has been processed, such process shall be confirmed to Interbolsa.

      The holders of Interbolsa Notes are reliant upon the procedures of Interbolsa to receive payment in
      respect of Interbolsa Notes.

(e)   Amounts payable in U.S. dollars (not applicable to Interbolsa Notes)
      Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Condition, if any amount of principal and/or interest
      in respect of this Note is payable in U.S. dollars, such U.S. dollar payments of principal and/or interest
      in respect of this Note will be made at the specified office of a Paying Agent in the United States if:

      (i)    the Bank has appointed Paying Agents with specified offices outside the United States with the
             reasonable expectation that such Paying Agents would be able to make payment in U.S. dollars


                                                     187
              at such specified offices outside the United States of the full amount of principal and interest
              on the Notes in the manner provided above when due;

      (ii)    payment of the full amount of such principal and interest at all such specified offices outside
              the United States is illegal or effectively precluded by exchange controls or other similar
              restrictions on the full payment or receipt of principal and interest in U.S. dollars; and

      (iii)   such payment is then permitted under United States law without involving, in the opinion of
              the Bank, adverse tax consequences to the Bank.

(f)   Payment Day
      If the date for payment of any amount in respect of any Note or Coupon is not a Payment Day, the
      holder thereof shall not be entitled to payment until the next following Payment Day in the relevant
      place and shall not be entitled to further interest or other payment in respect of such delay. For these
      purposes, “Payment Day” means any day which (subject to Condition 8 (Prescription)) is:

      (i)     a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are open
              for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency deposits) in:

              (A)   the relevant place of presentation (if presentation is required);

              (B)   in respect of Interbolsa Notes only, Lisbon;

              (C)   any Additional Financial Centre specified in the applicable Final Terms; and

      (ii)    either (1) in relation to any sum payable in a Specified Currency other than euro, a day on
              which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are open for
              general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency deposits) in the
              principal financial centre of the country of the relevant Specified Currency and any Additional
              Financial Centre and which, if the Specified Currency is Australian dollars or New Zealand
              dollars, shall be Sydney and Auckland, respectively) or (2) in relation to any sum payable in
              euro, a day on which the TARGET2 System is open.

(g)   Interpretation of Principal and Interest
      Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to principal in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to
      include, as applicable:

      (i)     any additional amounts which may be payable with respect to principal under Condition 7
              (Taxation) or, except in the case of Interbolsa Notes, pursuant to any undertakings given in
              addition thereto or in substitution therefor pursuant to the Trust Deed;

      (ii)    the Final Redemption Amount of the Notes;

      (iii)   the Redemption Amount of the Notes; or

      (iv)    the Optional Redemption Amount(s) (if any) of the Notes.

      Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to interest in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to
      include, as applicable, any additional amounts which may be payable with respect to interest under
      Condition 7 (Taxation) or, except in the case of Interbolsa Notes, pursuant to any undertakings given
      in addition thereto or in substitution therefor pursuant to the Trust Deed.

6.    Redemption and Purchase

(a)   Redemption                                                                                                 A5.4.8
                                                                                                                 A12.4.1.12
      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes are not subject to mandatory redemption by the Bank and
      will only be redeemed in the circumstances referred to under this Condition 6 (Redemption and




                                                     188
      Purchases), in any case provided that such redemption has been expressly authorised by the Bank of
      Portugal.

      The Bank may not choose to redeem the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes (Bank Call) before the
      fifth anniversary of their issue date other than in the specific circumstances described in paragraphs
      (b), (c) and (d) below, and in any case provided that the Bank of Portugal has previously approved
      such redemption.

      In the situations specified in this Condition 6 the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will be
      redeemed by the Bank at their Final Redemption Amount specified in, or determined in the manner
      specified in, the applicable Final Terms in the relevant Specified Currency on the relevant redemption
      date. Each Undated Deeply Subordinated Note is undated and accordingly has no final maturity date
      and is only redeemable or payable in accordance with the following provisions of this Condition 6
      (Redemption and Purchases).

(b)   Redemption for Tax Reasons
      The Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes may be redeemed at the option of the Bank (subject to the
      prior consent of the Bank of Portugal) in whole, but not in part, at any time (if this Undated Deeply
      Subordinated Note is neither a Floating Rate Note nor an Indexed Interest Note) or on any Interest
      Payment Date (if this Undated Deeply Subordinated Note is either a Floating Rate Note or an Indexed
      Linked Interest Note), on giving not less than 30 nor more than 60 days' notice to the Agent, the
      Trustee (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes), the Common Representative (in respect of Interbolsa
      Notes) and in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices), the Noteholders (which notice shall be
      irrevocable) if:

      (i)     on the occasion of the next payment due under the Notes, the Bank has or will become obliged
              to pay additional amounts as provided or referred to in Condition 7 (Taxation) as a result of any
              change in, or amendment to, the laws or regulations of any Relevant Tax Jurisdiction or any
              political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax, or any change in
              the application or official interpretation of such laws or regulations, which change or
              amendment becomes effective on or after the Issue Date of the first Tranche of the Notes;

      (ii)    the Bank satisfies the Trustee (except in the case of Interbolsa Notes) or the Common
              Representative and the Portuguese Paying Agent (in the case of Interbolsa Notes) immediately
              prior to the giving of such notice as to (i) above; and

      (iii)   such obligation cannot be avoided by the Bank taking reasonable measures available to it,

      provided that no such notice of redemption shall be given earlier than 90 days prior to the earliest date
      on which the Bank would be obliged to pay such additional amounts were a payment in respect of the
      Notes then due.

      Prior to the publication of any notice of redemption pursuant to this Condition 6(b), the Bank shall
      deliver to the Agent and the Common Representative (in respect of Interbolsa Notes) or to the Trustee
      (in respect of any Note other than an Interbolsa Note) a certificate signed by two Directors of the Bank
      stating that the Bank is entitled to effect such redemption and setting forth a statement of facts
      showing that the conditions precedent to the right of the Bank so to redeem have occurred, and an
      opinion of independent legal advisers of recognised standing to the effect that the Bank has or will
      become obliged to pay such additional amounts as a result of such change or amendment. The Trustee
      or, as the case may be, the Agent and the Common Representative, shall be entitled to accept any such
      certificate and opinion delivered to it as sufficient evidence of the satisfaction of such conditions
      precedent in which event they shall be conclusive and binding on the Noteholders and the
      Couponholders.

      “Relevant Tax Jurisdiction” means Portugal.




                                                     189
      Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes redeemed pursuant to this Condition 6(b) will be redeemed at
      their Redemption Amount referred to in paragraph (e) below together (if appropriate) with interest
      accrued to (but excluding) the date of redemption.

(c)   Redemption at the Option of the Issuer (Issuer Call)
      If Issuer Call is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the Bank may (subject to the prior consent of
      the Bank of Portugal) and other than during the first five years following the issue date of the Undated
      Deeply Subordinated Notes, or, if prior to such date, provided that the Bank of Portugal has expressly
      confirmed its understanding that the relevant Tranche of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes being
      redeemed is replaced with another Tranche which in the opinion of the Bank of Portugal satisfies at
      least the same requirements as the Redeemed Notes (as defined below) in terms of eligibility as Tier
      1 capital of the Bank), having given:

      (i)    not less than 30 nor more than 60 days’ notice to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition
             13 (Notices); and

      (ii)   not less than 15 days before the giving of the notice referred to in (i), notice to the Agent and
             (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes) to the Trustee and (in respect of Interbolsa Notes) to the
             Common Representative,

      (which notices shall be irrevocable), redeem all or some only of the Notes then outstanding on any
      Optional Redemption Date and at the Optional Redemption Amount(s) specified in, or determined in
      the manner specified in, the applicable Final Terms together, if appropriate, with interest accrued to
      (but excluding) the relevant Optional Redemption Date. Any such redemption must be of a nominal
      amount not less than the Minimum Redemption Amount or not more than a Higher Redemption
      Amount, in each case as may be specified in the applicable Final Terms. In the case of a partial
      redemption of Notes, the Notes to be redeemed (“Redeemed Notes”) will, not more than 30 days prior
      to the date fixed for redemption (such date of selection being hereinafter called the “Selection Date”),
      be selected (i) individually by lot, in the case of Redeemed Notes represented by definitive Notes, (ii)
      in accordance with the rules of Euroclear and/ or Clearstream, Luxembourg (to be reflected in the
      records of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg as either a pool factor or a reduction in nominal
      amount, at their discretion), in the case of Redeemed Notes represented by a global Note and (iii) in
      accordance with the rules of Interbolsa, in the case of Redeemed Notes that are Interbolsa Notes. In
      the case of Redeemed Notes represented by definitive Notes, a list of the serial numbers of such
      Redeemed Notes will be published in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices) not less than 15 days
      prior to the date fixed for redemption. No exchange of the relevant global Note will be permitted
      during the period from and including the Selection Date to and including the date fixed for redemption
      pursuant to this paragraph (c) and notice to that effect shall be given by the Bank to the Noteholders
      in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices) at least five days prior to the Selection Date.

(d)   Redemption for reason of Disqualification as Original Own Funds
      If a Disqualification as Original Own Funds Event has occurred and is continuing, the Undated
      Deeply Subordinated Notes will be redeemed on any date, at the Bank’s option, by giving not less than
      30 nor more than 60 days' notice to the holders and subject to the prior consent of the Bank of
      Portugal. In such circumstances the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes will be redeemed at their
      nominal amount, together (if appropriate) with interest accrued to (but excluding) the date of
      redemption.

      “Disqualification as Original Own Funds Events” means any change (i) in any applicable law or
      regulations, or (ii) in the application or official interpretation of such laws or regulations, as a result
      of which the Board of Directors or the Executive Committee of the Bank, as the case may be, decides,
      or the Bank of Portugal either publicly or by means of individual notification to the Bank determines,
      that for the purposes of the Own Funds Requirements Regulations the Undated Deeply Subordinated
      Notes are no longer eligible as Tier 1 Capital for the Bank and/or for the consolidation perimeter in
      which the Bank is included for regulatory capital purposes.



                                                     190
(e)   Redemption Amounts
      For the purpose of paragraph (b) above, the Notes will be redeemed at the Redemption Amount
      calculated as follows:

      (i)    in the case of Notes with a Final Redemption Amount equal to the Issue Price, at the Final
             Redemption Amount thereof;

      (ii)   in the case of Notes with a Final Redemption Amount which is or may be less than the Issue
             Price or which is payable in a Specified Currency other than that in which the Notes are
             denominated, at the amount specified in, or determined in the manner specified in, the
             applicable Final Terms or, if no such amount or manner is so specified in the Final Terms, at
             their nominal amount.

(f)   Purchases
      The Bank or any of the companies included in the same group as the Bank (either the Bank’s
      subsidiaries, the parent company Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (“ESFG”), or any other
      companies included for accounting purposes within ESFG consolidated perimeter) may, subject to the
      prior consent of the Bank of Portugal, at any time purchase Notes (provided that, in the case of
      Definitive Notes, all unmatured Coupons and Talons appertaining thereto are purchased therewith) at
      any price in the open market or otherwise. Such Notes may be held, reissued, resold or, at the option
      of the Bank, surrendered to any Paying Agent for cancellation or, in the case of Interbolsa Notes,
      cancelled by Interbolsa following receipt by Interbolsa of notice thereof on by or on behalf of the
      Bank. In accordance with the existing Own Funds Requirements Regulations and the related
      executing measures recognized by the Bank of Portugal, the Bank and any of the companies included
      in the same group as the Bank (either the Bank’s subsidiaries, ESFG or any other companies included
      for accounting purposes within ESFG consolidated group) are currently not allowed to hold Undated
      Deeply Subordinated Notes in excess of the lower of: a) 10 per cent. of a specific issue amount, and
      b) 3 per cent. of all issues of Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes outstanding, or c) any other specific
      thresholds which are recognized by the Bank of Portugal in the future.

(g)   Cancellation
      All global Notes and definitive Notes which are redeemed will forthwith be cancelled (together with
      all unmatured Coupons attached thereto or surrendered therewith at the time of redemption). All
      global Notes and definitive Notes so cancelled and the global Notes and definitive Notes purchased
      and cancelled pursuant to paragraph (f) above (together with all unmatured Coupons cancelled
      therewith) shall be forwarded to the Agent and cannot be reissued or resold.

      All Interbolsa Notes which are (a) redeemed or (b) purchased by or on behalf of the Bank or any of
      the companies included in the same group as the Bank (either the Bank’s subsidiaries, ESFG or any
      other companies included for accounting purposes within ESFG consolidated group) will forthwith be
      cancelled, by Interbolsa following receipt by Interbolsa of notice thereof by the Portuguese Paying
      Agent, and accordingly such Interbolsa Notes may not be held, reissued or resold and shall not entitle
      the holder to vote at any meetings of the Noteholders and shall not be deemed to be outstanding for
      the purposes of calculating quorums at meetings of the Noteholders or for the purposes of Condition
      14 (Meetings of Noteholders, Modification and Waiver) or the Principal Agency Agreement, as
      amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement.

7.    Taxation                                                                                                   A5.4.1.14
                                                                                                                 A12.4.1.14
All payments of principal and interest in respect of the Notes and Coupons by the Bank will be made without
withholding or deduction for or on account of any present or future taxes or duties of whatever nature
imposed or levied by or on behalf of any Relevant Tax Jurisdiction as defined in Condition 6(b) (Redemption
for Tax Reasons) or any political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax, unless
such withholding or deduction is required by law. In such event, the Bank will pay such additional amounts
as shall be necessary in order that the net amounts received by the holders of the Notes or Coupons after such



                                                     191
withholding or deduction shall equal the respective amounts of principal and interest which would otherwise
have been receivable in respect of the Notes or Coupons, as the case may be, in the absence of such
withholding or deduction; except that no such additional amounts shall be payable with respect to any Note
or Coupon:

(i)     the Noteholder or Couponholder of which is liable to such taxes, duties, assessments or governmental
        charges in respect of such Note or Coupon by reason of its having some connection with the Relevant
        Jurisdiction by which such taxes, duties, assessments or charges have been imposed, levied, collected,
        withheld or assessed other than the mere holding of the Note or Coupon; and/or

(ii)    where such withholding or deduction is imposed on a payment to or for an individual and is required
        to be made pursuant to European Council Directive 2003/48/EC or any law implementing or
        complying with, or introduced in order to conform to, such Directive; and/or

(iii)   in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Noteholder or Couponholder of which
        would be able to avoid such withholding or deduction by presenting the relevant Note or Coupon to
        another Paying Agent in a Member State of the European Union; and/or

(iv)    in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, a Noteholder or Couponholder in
        respect of whom the information and documentation (which may include certificates) required in
        order to comply with Portuguese Decree-Law 193/2005 of 7th November, 2005, and any
        implementing legislation, is not received before the Income Payment Date or which does not comply
        with the formalities in order to benefit from tax treaty benefits, where applicable; and/or

(v)     in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, a Noteholder or Couponholder
        resident for tax purposes in the Republic of Portugal or any political subdivision or any authority
        thereof or therein having power to tax or a resident in a tax haven jurisdiction as defined in Order
        150/2004, of 13th February, 2004 (Portaria do Ministro das Finanças e da Administração Pública no
        150/2004) as amended from time to time, issued by the Portuguese Minister of Finance and Public
        Administration, with the exception of central banks and governmental agencies of those blacklisted
        jurisdictions, or a non-resident legal entity held, directly or indirectly, in more than 20 per cent. by
        entities resident in the Republic of Portugal; and/or

(vi)    in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, (i) a Portuguese resident legal entity
        subject to Portuguese corporation tax with the exception of entities that benefit from a Portuguese
        withholding tax waiver or from Portuguese income tax exemptions, or (ii) a legal entity not resident
        in Portugal acting with respect to the holding of the Notes through a permanent establishment in
        Portugal; and/or

(vii) in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes where presentation of the Note or Coupon is
      required, presented for payment more than 30 days after the Relevant Date except to the extent that
      the holder thereof would have been entitled to an additional amount on presenting the same for
      payment on such thirtieth day, assuming that day to have been a Payment Day (as defined in Condition
      5 (Payments)).

As used herein, the “Relevant Date” means the date on which such payment first becomes due, except that,
if the full amount of the moneys payable has not been duly received by the Agent or (other than in the case
of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee on or prior to such due date, it means the date on which, the full amount of
such moneys having been so received, notice to that effect is duly given to the Noteholders in accordance
with Condition 13 (Notices).

8.      Prescription                                                                                                    A5.4.7

The global Notes, definitive Notes, Receipts and Coupons will become void unless claims in respect of
principal and/or interest are made within a period of 10 years (in the case of principal) and five years (in the
case of interest) after the Relevant Date (as defined in Condition 7 (Taxation)) therefor.




                                                        192
There shall not be included in any Coupon sheet issued on exchange of a Talon any Coupon the claim for
payment in respect of which would be void pursuant to this Condition 8 (Prescription) or Condition 5(b)
(Presentation of definitive Notes and Coupons) or any Talon which itself would be void pursuant to
Condition 5(b) (Presentation of definitive Notes and Coupons).

Claims for principal and interest in respect of the Interbolsa Notes shall become void unless the relevant
Certificates are surrendered within 20 years and five years respectively of the Relevant Date.

9.      Events of Default relating to Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes
There will be no events of default in respect of the Undated Deeply Subordinated Notes.

10.     Replacement of global Notes, definitive Notes Coupons and Talons
Should any global Note, definitive Note, Coupon or Talon be lost, stolen, mutilated, defaced or destroyed, it
may be replaced at the specified office of the Agent upon payment by the claimant of such costs and expenses
as may be incurred in connection therewith and on such terms as to evidence and indemnity as the Bank may
reasonably require. Mutilated or defaced global Notes, definitive Notes Coupons or Talons must be
surrendered before replacements will be issued.

11.     Agent and Paying Agents
The names of the initial Agent and the other initial Paying Agents and their initial specified offices are set
out below.

The Bank is entitled (with the prior written consent of the Trustee, save that such consent will not be required
in respect of the Portuguese Paying Agent) to vary or terminate the appointment of any Paying Agent and/or
appoint additional or other Paying Agents and/ or approve any change in the specified office through which
any Paying Agent acts, provided that:

(i)     so long as the Notes are listed on any stock exchange or admitted to listing by any relevant authority,
        there will at all times be a Paying Agent with a specified office in such place as may be required by
        the rules and regulations of the relevant stock exchange or such other relevant authority;

(ii)    there will at all times be maintained a Paying Agent in a Member State of the European Union that is
        not obliged to withhold or deduct tax pursuant to European Council Directive 2003/48/ EC or any law
        implementing or complying with, or introduced in order to conform to, such Directive;

(iii)   there will at all times be a Paying Agent outside of Portugal; and

(iv)    there will at all times be a Paying Agent in Portugal capable of making payment in respect of the
        Interbolsa Notes as contemplated by these terms and conditions, the Principal Agency Agreement, as
        amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and applicable Portuguese law and regulation.

In addition, the Bank shall forthwith appoint a Paying Agent having a specified office in New York City in
the circumstances described in the final paragraph of Condition 5(e) (Amounts payable in U.S. dollars (not
applicable to Interbolsa Notes)). Any variation, termination, appointment or change shall only take effect
(other than in the case of insolvency, when it shall be of immediate effect) after not less than 30 nor more
than 45 days’ prior notice thereof shall have been given to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 13
(Notices).

12.     Exchange of Talons
On and after the Interest Payment Date on which the final Coupon comprised in any Coupon sheet matures,
the Talon (if any) forming part of such Coupon sheet may be surrendered at the specified office of the Agent
or any other Paying Agent in exchange for a further Coupon sheet including (if such further Coupon sheet
does not include Coupons to (and including) the final date for the payment of interest due in respect of the
Note to which it appertains) a further Talon, subject to the provisions of Condition 8 (Prescription).



                                                      193
13.   Notices
All notices regarding the Notes shall be published (i) in a leading English language daily newspaper of
general circulation in London, (ii) if and for so long as the Notes are listed on the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange, in a daily newspaper of general circulation in Luxembourg and (iii) if the Notes are Interbolsa
Notes, by registered mail, by publication in a leading newspaper having general circulation in Portugal
(which is expected to be Diário de Notícias) or by any other way which complies with the Portuguese
Securities Code and Interbolsa’s rules on notices to investors, including the disclosure of information
through the CMVM official website (www.cmvm.pt). It is expected that publication under (i) and (ii) above
will be made in the Financial Times or any other daily newspaper in London (which, unless such Notice is
given in respect of Interbolsa Notes only, shall be approved by the Trustee) and the Luxemburger Wort in
Luxembourg, respectively. In addition, all notices regarding the Notes may be published on the Luxembourg
Stock Exchange’s web site (www.bourse.lu). The Bank shall also ensure that notices are duly published in a
manner which complies with the rules and regulations of any other stock exchange or any other relevant
authority on which the Notes are for the time being listed or by which they have been admitted to trading.

Any such notice will be deemed to have been given on the date of the first publication or, where required to
be published in more than one newspaper, on the date of the first publication in all the required newspapers.

Until such time as any definitive Notes are issued, there may (provided that, in the case of Notes listed on a
stock exchange or admitted to listing by another relevant authority, the rules of such stock exchange or other
relevant authority permits), so long as any the global Note(s) is or are held in its/their entirety on behalf of
Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg, be substituted for such publication in such newspaper(s) the
delivery of the relevant notice to Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg for communication by them to the
holders of the Notes and, in addition, for so long as any Notes are listed on a stock exchange or are admitted
to trading by another relevant authority and the rules of that stock exchange or relevant authority so require,
such notice will be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the place or places required by
those rules. Any such notice shall be deemed to have been given to the holders of the Notes on the seventh
day after the day on which the said notice was given to Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg. However,
all notices regarding Notes which are listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange must be published in a daily
newspaper of general circulation in Luxembourg.

Notices to be given by any holder of the Notes shall be in writing and given by lodging the same with the
Portuguese Paying Agent in the case of Interbolsa Notes and by lodging the same, together with the relative
Note or Notes, with the Agent in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes. Whilst any of the
Notes are represented by a global Note, such notice may be given by any holder of a Note to the Agent via
Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, in such manner as the Agent and Euroclear
and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, may approve for this purpose.

Any holder of an Interbolsa Note may give notice to the Portuguese Paying Agent and the Agent through
Interbolsa in such manner as the Portuguese Paying Agent, the Agent and Interbolsa may approve for this
purpose.

14.   Meetings of Noteholders, Modification and Waiver

(a)   Meetings in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes
      This Condition 14(a) does not apply to Interbolsa Notes. The Trust Deed contains provisions for
      convening meetings of the Noteholders to consider any matter affecting their interests, including the
      sanctioning by Extraordinary Resolution of a modification of the terms and conditions of the Notes,
      the Coupons or any of the provisions of the Trust Deed. Such a meeting may be convened by the Bank
      or Noteholders holding not less than five per cent. in nominal amount of the Notes for the time being
      remaining outstanding. The quorum at any such meeting for passing an Extraordinary Resolution is
      one or more persons holding or representing not less than a clear majority in nominal amount of the
      Notes for the time being outstanding, or at any adjourned meeting one or more persons being or
      representing Noteholders whatever the nominal amount of the Notes so held or represented, except
      that at any meeting the business of which includes the modification of certain provisions of the Notes
      or Coupons (including modifying any date for payment of interest on the Notes, reducing or


                                                      194
cancelling the amount of principal, modification of any Minimum Rate of Interest or Maximum Rate
of Interest or altering the currency of payment of the Notes or Coupons, modification of the majority
required to pass an Extraordinary Resolution or modification of the Trust Deed concerning this
exception), the quorum shall be one or more persons holding or representing not less than two-thirds,
or at any adjourned such meeting one or more persons holding or representing not less than one-third,
in nominal amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding. An Extraordinary Resolution passed
at any meeting of the Noteholders shall be binding on all the Noteholders, whether or not they are
present at the meeting, and on all Couponholders.

Without prejudice to the provision of Condition 4 (Interest and Interest Cancellation), the Trustee and
the Bank may agree, without the consent of the Noteholders or Couponholders, to:

(i)    any modification (except as mentioned above) of the Notes, the Coupons or the Trust Deed
       which is not, in the opinion of the Trustee, materially prejudicial to the interests of the
       Noteholders; or

(ii)   any modification of the Notes, the Coupons or the Trust Deed which is of a formal, minor or
       technical nature or is made to correct a manifest error or to comply with mandatory provisions
       of the law of the jurisdiction in which the Bank is incorporated.

Any such modification shall be binding on the Noteholders and the Couponholders and any such
modification shall be notified to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices) as soon
as practicable thereafter.

The Trustee may also waive or authorise any breach or proposed breach of any of the provisions of
the Trust Deed or any of these Terms and Conditions which, in the opinion of the Trustee, is not
materially prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders.

In connection with the exercise by it of any of its trusts, powers or discretions (including, without
limitation, any modification, waiver, authorisation or substitution), the Trustee shall have regard to the
general interests of the Noteholders as a class and shall not have regard to any interests arising from
circumstances particular to individual Noteholders (whatever their number) and, in particular, but
without limitation, shall not have regard to the consequences of the exercise of its trusts, powers or
discretions for individual Noteholders or Couponholders (whatever their number) resulting from their
being for any purpose domiciled or resident in, or otherwise connected with, or subject to the
jurisdiction of, any particular territory and the Trustee shall not be entitled to require, nor shall any
Noteholder or Couponholder be entitled to claim, from the Bank or any other person any
indemnification or payment in respect of any tax consequence of any such exercise upon individual
Noteholders or Couponholders except to the extent already provided for in Condition 7 (Taxation)
and/or any undertaking given in addition to, or in substitution for, Condition 7 (Taxation) pursuant to
the Trust Deed.

Nothing in these Terms and Conditions or the Trust Deed shall require the Trustee to have regard to
the interests of Noteholders insofar as those interests arise by virtue of a holding of Interbolsa Notes.
For the avoidance of doubt, without prejudice to any rights assumed under Notes which are not
Interbolsa Notes, a holder of Interbolsa Notes shall neither, by virtue of such holding of Interbolsa
Notes, count towards a quorum, nor be entitled to vote, in respect of a resolution to amend the Trust
Deed.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, any modification of any of these Terms and Conditions or any of the
provisions of the Notes, the Coupons or the Trust Deed that the Bank, in its absolute discretion,
believes would or might cause the Notes to cease to be eligible as Tier 1 Capital of the Bank and/or
for the consolidation perimeter in which the Bank is included for regulatory capital purposes (or to
cease to be eligible for such other regulatory capital treatment as may apply to such Notes
immediately prior to any such modification) may only be made with the prior consent of the Bank of
Portugal and shall not take effect until such consent is obtained.




                                               195
(b)   Meetings in respect of Interbolsa Notes
      The remainder of this Condition 14 applies only to Interbolsa Notes.

      Meetings
      Meetings of the holders of Interbolsa Notes may be convened to consider any matter affecting their
      interests, including the appointment or dismissal of the Common Representative and the sanctioning
      by Extraordinary Resolution of a modification of the terms and conditions of the Notes and are
      governed by the Portuguese Commercial Companies Code enacted by Decree-Law 262/86 of
      2nd September, 1986, as amended, and by the Common Representative Appointment Agreement.

      Such meetings may be convened by the Common Representative (if any) or, if no Common
      Representative has been appointed, or an appointed Common Representative fails to convene a
      meeting, by the chairman of the general meeting of shareholders of the Bank, and shall be convened
      if requested by Noteholders holding not less than 5 per cent. in principal amount of the Notes for the
      time being outstanding.

      The quorum required for a meeting convened to pass a resolution other than an Extraordinary
      Resolution will be any person or persons holding or representing Notes then outstanding, regardless
      of the principal amount thereof. The quorum required for a meeting convened to pass an Extraordinary
      Resolution will be a person or persons holding or representing at least 50 per cent. of the Notes then
      outstanding or, at any adjourned meeting, any person or persons holding or representing any of the
      Notes then outstanding, regardless of the principal amount thereof.

      The number of votes required to pass a resolution other than an Extraordinary Resolution is a majority
      of the votes cast at the relevant meeting. The majority required to pass an Extraordinary Resolution is
      at least 50 per cent. of the principal amount of the Notes then outstanding or, at any adjourned
      meeting, two- thirds of the votes cast at the relevant meeting.

      Resolutions passed at any meeting of the Noteholders will be binding on all Noteholders, whether or
      not they are present at the meeting or have voted against the approved resolutions.

      Dismissal and substitution of the Common Representative
      The Noteholders may dismiss and substitute the Common Representative by means of a resolution
      passed for such purpose upon the terms and conditions of the Common Representative Appointment
      Agreement.

      Notification
      Any modification, abrogation, waiver or authorisation in accordance with this Condition 14 shall be
      binding on the Noteholders and shall be notified by the Bank to the Noteholders as soon as practicable
      thereafter in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices).

      Matters required to be approved by Extraordinary Resolution
      Without prejudice to the provision of Condition 4 (Interest and Interest Cancellation), an
      Extraordinary Resolution will be required to effect any of the following:

      (i)     to change any date fixed for payment of principal or interest in respect of the Notes, reduction
              of the amount of principal or interest due on any date in respect of the Notes or variation of the
              method of calculating the amount of any payment in respect of the Notes on redemption;

      (ii)    to approve the modification or abrogation of any of the provisions of these Conditions;

      (iii)   to approve any amendment of this definition;

      (iv)    to waive or authorise any breach or proposed breach of any of these Terms and Conditions; and




                                                      196
      (v)    to approve any other matter in respect of which these Terms and Conditions require an
             Extraordinary Resolution to be passed.

      Notwithstanding the foregoing, any modification of any of these Terms and Conditions or any of the
      provisions of the Notes, the Coupons or the Common Representative Appointment Agreement that the
      Bank, in its absolute discretion, believes would or might cause the Notes to cease to be eligible as Tier
      1 Capital of the Bank and/or for the consolidation perimeter in which the Bank is included for
      regulatory capital purposes (or to cease to be eligible for such other regulatory capital treatment as
      may apply to such Notes immediately prior to any such modification) may only be made with the prior
      consent of the Bank of Portugal and shall not take effect until such consent is obtained

      Matters in the discretion of the Agent and the Bank
      Except for those matters required to be approved by Extraordinary Resolution, the Agent, the
      Common Representative and the Bank may agree, without the consent of the Noteholders, to:

      (i)    any modification of the Notes which is not materially prejudicial to the interests of the
             Noteholders; or

      (ii)   any modification of the Notes which is of a formal, minor or technical nature or is made to
             correct a manifest error or to comply with mandatory provisions of the law of the jurisdiction
             in which the Bank is incorporated.

      Any such modification shall be binding on the Noteholders and shall be notified to the Noteholders
      in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices) as soon as practicable thereafter.

15.   Further Issues
The Bank shall be at liberty from time to time without the consent of the Noteholders or Couponholders to
create and issue further notes having terms and conditions the same as the Notes or the same in all respects
save for the amount and date of the first payment of interest thereon and so that the same shall be
consolidated and form a single Series with the outstanding Notes.

In the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trust Deed contains provisions for convening a
single meeting of the Noteholders and the holders of notes of other Series of bearer Notes other than
Interbolsa Notes in certain circumstances where the Trustee so decides.

16.   Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999
This Condition applies if the Notes are governed by English law. No rights are conferred on any person under
the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any term of the Notes, but this does not affect
any right or remedy of any person which exists or is available apart from that Act.

17.   Indemnification of Trustee
The Trust Deed contains provisions for the indemnification of the Trustee and for its relief from
responsibility. The Trustee is entitled to enter into business transactions with the Bank without accounting
for any profit resulting therefrom and to act as trustee for the holders of any other securities issued by the
Bank.

18.   Redenomination and Exchange
This Condition 18 (Redenomination and Exchange) does not apply to Interbolsa Notes.

(a)   Redenomination
      Where redenomination is specified in the applicable Final Terms as being applicable, the Bank may,
      without the consent of the Noteholders and the Couponholders, on giving prior notice to the Agent,
      the Trustee, Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg and at least 30 days’ prior notice to the



                                                     197
Noteholders in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices), elect that, with effect from the
Redenomination Date specified in the notice, the Notes shall be redenominated in euro.

The election will have effect as follows:

(i)     the Notes shall be deemed to be redenominated into euro in the denomination of euro 0.01 with
        a principal amount for each Note equal to the principal amount of that Note in the Specified
        Currency, converted into euro at the Established Rate, provided that, if the Bank determines,
        after consultation with the Agent and with the approval of the Trustee, that the then market
        practice in respect of the redenomination into euro of internationally offered securities is
        different from the provisions specified in this Condition 18 (Redenomination and Exchange),
        such provisions shall be deemed to be amended so as to comply with such market practice and
        the Bank shall promptly notify the Noteholders, the stock exchange (if any) on which the Notes
        may be listed, the Paying Agents and the Trustee of such deemed amendments;
(ii)    save to the extent that an Exchange Notice has been given in accordance with paragraph (iv)
        below, the amount of interest due in respect of the Notes will be calculated by reference to the
        aggregate principal amount of Notes held (or, as the case may be, in respect of which Coupons
        are presented) for payment by the relevant holder and the amount of such payment shall be
        rounded down to the nearest euro 0.01;
(iii)   if definitive Notes are required to be issued after the Redenomination Date, they shall be issued
        at the expense of the Bank in the denominations of euro 1,000, euro 10,000, euro 100,000 and
        (but only to the extent of any remaining amounts less than euro 1,000 or such smaller
        denominations as the Agent may approve) euro 0.01 and/or such other denominations as the
        Agent shall determine and notify to the Noteholders;
(iv)    if issued prior to the Redenomination Date, all unmatured Coupons denominated in the
        Specified Currency (whether or not attached to the Notes) will become void with effect from
        the date on which the Bank gives notice (the “Exchange Notice”) that replacement
        euro-denominated Notes and Coupons are available for exchange (provided that such securities
        are so available) and no payments will be made in respect of them. The payment obligations
        contained in any Notes so issued will also become void on that date although those Notes will
        continue to constitute valid exchange obligations of the Bank. New euro-denominated Notes
        and Coupons will be issued in exchange for Notes and Coupons denominated in the Specified
        Currency in such manner as the Agent may specify and as shall be notified to the Noteholders
        in the Exchange Notice. No Exchange Notice may be given less than 15 days prior to any date
        for payment of principal or interest on the Notes;
(v)     after the Redenomination Date, all payments in respect of the Notes and the Coupons, other
        than payments of interest in respect of periods commencing before the Redenomination Date,
        will be made solely in euro as though references in the Notes to the Specified Currency were
        to euro. Payments will be made in euro by credit or transfer to a euro account (or any other
        account to which euro may be credited or transferred) specified by the payee or, at the option
        of the payee, by a euro cheque;
(vi)    if the Notes are Fixed Rate Notes and interest for any period ending on or after the
        Redenomination Date is required to be calculated for a period ending other than on an Interest
        Payment Date, it will be calculated by applying the Rate of Interest to:

        (A)   in the case of Fixed Rate Notes which are either Interbolsa Notes or are represented by
              a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, the full
              nominal amount outstanding of the Fixed Rate Notes; or

        (B)   in the case of Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form, the Calculation Amount, and, in each
              case, multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction, and rounding the
              resultant figure to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any
              such subunit being rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market



                                               198
                    convention. Where the Specified Denomination of a Fixed Rate Note in definitive form
                    is a multiple of the Calculation Amount, the amount of interest payable in respect of
                    such Fixed Rate Note shall be the product of the amount (determined in the manner
                    provided above) for the Calculation Amount and the amount by which the Calculation
                    Amount is multiplied to reach the Specified Denomination, without any further
                    rounding;

      (vii) if the Notes are Floating Rate Notes the applicable Final Terms specifies any relevant changes
            to the provisions relating to interest; and

      (viii) such other changes shall be made to these Terms and Conditions and/or the Trust Deed and/ or
             the Principal Agency Agreement as the Bank may decide, after consultation with the Agent and
             with the approval of the Trustee; and as may be specified in the notice, to conform them to
             conventions then applicable to instruments denominated in euro or to enable the Notes to be
             consolidated with one or more issues of other notes, whether or not originally denominated in
             the Specified Currency or euro. Any such other changes will not take effect until after they have
             been notified to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices).

(b)   Exchange
      Where exchange is specified in the applicable Final Terms as being applicable, the Bank may, without
      the consent of the Noteholders and the Couponholders, on giving prior notice to the Agent, the
      Trustee, Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg and not less than 30 days’ prior notice to the
      Noteholders in accordance with Condition 13 (Notices), elect that, with effect from the
      Redenomination Date specified in the notice, the Notes shall be exchangeable for Notes expressed to
      be denominated in euro in accordance with such arrangements as the Bank may decide, after
      consultation with the Agent and with the approval of the Trustee and as may be specified in the notice,
      including arrangements under which Coupons unmatured at the date so specified become void.

(c)   Definitions
      In these Terms and Conditions, the following expressions have the following meanings:
      “Established Rate” means the rate for the conversion of the Specified Currency (including compliance
      with rules relating to roundings in accordance with applicable European Union regulations) into euro
      established by the Council of the European Union pursuant to Article 109l(4) of the Treaty;
      “Euro” means the currency introduced at the start of the third stage of European economic and
      monetary union pursuant to the Treaty;
      “Redenomination Date” means (in the case of interest bearing Notes) any date for payment of interest
      under the Notes which falls on or after the date on which the country of the Specified Currency first
      participates in the third stage of European economic and monetary union; and
      “Treaty” means the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, as amended.

20.   Governing law and submission to jurisdiction                                                               A5.4.2
                                                                                                                 A12.4.1.3
(a)   The Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent
      amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes (except
      Conditions 2, 4 and 6), the Coupons (and any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in
      connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa
      Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, bearer Notes other than
      Interbolsa Notes (except Conditions 2, 4 and 6) and the Coupons) are governed by, and shall be
      construed in accordance with, English law. Interbolsa Notes, the Principal Agency Agreement, in
      respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the
      Common Representative Appointment Agreement and Conditions 2, 4 and 6 (and any non-contractual
      obligations arising out of or in connection with the Interbolsa Notes, the Principal Agency Agreement,
      in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the
      Common Representative Appointment Agreement and Conditions 2, 4 and 6) are governed by, and


                                                    199
      shall be construed in accordance with, Portuguese law. In each case, the application of such governing
      law shall be without prejudice to the applicability, under the conflicts of rules applicable in the
      relevant forum, in the light of such submission, of Portuguese law.

(b)   The Bank agrees, for the exclusive benefit of the Trustee, the Noteholders and the Couponholders that
      the courts of England are to have jurisdiction to settle any disputes which may arise out of or in
      connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa
      Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than
      Interbolsa Notes and/or the Coupons (including a dispute relating to any non-contractual obligations
      arising out of or in connection with Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of
      Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes
      other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the Coupons) and that accordingly any suit, action or proceedings
      (together referred to as “Proceedings”) arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the
      Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the
      Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the Coupons
      (including any Proceedings relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection
      with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the
      extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa
      Notes and/or the Coupons) may be brought in such courts.
      The Bank agrees for the exclusive benefit of the Noteholders that the courts of Portugal are to have
      jurisdiction to settle any disputes which may arise out of or in connection with the Principal Agency
      Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes and
      that accordingly any suit action or proceedings (together referred to as “Proceedings in Respect of
      Interbolsa Notes”) arising out of or in connection with the Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of
      the Interbolsa Notes to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common
      Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes (including any Proceedings in
      Respect of Interbolsa Notes relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection
      with the Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the
      Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the
      Interbolsa Notes) may be brought in such courts.
      The Bank hereby irrevocably waives any objection which it may have now or hereafter to the laying
      of the venue of any such Proceedings and Proceedings in respect of Interbolsa Notes (including any
      Proceedings and Proceedings in respect of Interbolsa Notes relating to any non-contractual
      obligations arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement
      except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the Coupons, the Principal Agency
      Agreement in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes) in any
      such court and any claim that any such Proceedings have been brought in an inconvenient forum and
      further irrevocably agrees that a judgment in any such Proceedings brought in the English courts or
      in the Portuguese courts, as the case may be, shall be conclusive and binding upon it and may be
      enforced in the courts of any other jurisdiction.
      Nothing contained in this Condition shall limit any right to take Proceedings against the Bank in any
      other court of competent jurisdiction, nor shall the taking of Proceedings in one or more jurisdictions
      preclude the taking of Proceedings in any other jurisdiction, whether concurrently or not.
      The Bank appoints the London branch of the Bank at its office in London for the time being (being
      as at 3rd November, 2010 at 10 Paternoster Square, London EC4M 7AL) as its agent for service of
      process, and undertakes that, in the event of the London branch of the Bank ceasing so to act, it will
      appoint another person as its agent for service of process in England in respect of any Proceedings.
      Nothing herein shall affect the right to serve proceedings in any other manner permitted by law.




                                                    200
21.   Common Representative
In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the holders of the Notes shall at all times be entitled to appoint and dismiss
a Common Representative by means of a resolution and pursuant to the Common Representative
Appointment Agreement. Upon the appointment of a new Common Representative by the holders of the
Notes pursuant to this Condition, any previously appointed and dismissed Common Representative will
immediately cease its engagement and will be under the obligation immediately to transfer to the new
Common Representative appointed by the holders of the Notes all documents and information then held by
such Common Representative pertaining to the Notes.




                                                     201
                                                                                                                   A5.3.2
                                       USE OF PROCEEDS
The net proceeds from each issue of Notes will be applied by the relevant Issuer for general financing             A12.3.2
requirements in the relevant Issuer’s general corporate purposes, which include making a profit. If, in respect
of any particular issue, there is a particular identified use of proceeds, this will be stated in the applicable
Final Terms.




                                                      202
                                         BES FINANCE LTD.
History                                                                                                                A4. 5.1.1
                                                                                                                       A4. 5.1.2
BES Finance was incorporated in the Cayman Islands (with registered number 69526) on 15th November,
                                                                                                                       A4. 5.1.3
1996 for an unlimited duration and with limited liability as an exempted company under the laws of the
Cayman Islands.

The registered office of BES Finance is c/o Maples Corporate Services Limited, PO Box 309, Ugland House,               A4. 5.1.4
Grand Cayman, KY1-1104, Cayman Islands.

Directors
The Directors of BES Finance are:                                                                                      A4.10.1


Name                                               Function within the Issuer Function within the Guarantor
Ricardo Espírito Santo Silva Salgado               Director                       Director
Ricardo Abecassis Espírito Santo Silva             Director                       Director
Amílcar Carlos Ferreira de Morais Pires            Director                       Director
Isabel Maria Carvalho de Almeida                   Director                       Advisor to the Board
                                                                                  of Directors
Jose Leal de Faria                                 Director                       Director

The business address for all the above Directors is Avenida da Liberdade, 195, 1250-142 Lisbon, Portugal.

BES Finance has no employees or non-executive Directors.

BES Finance is not aware of any potential conflicts of interest between the duties to BES Finance of the
persons listed above and their private interests or other duties.                                                      A4.10.2


BES has an Audit Committee which is responsible for all units within the BES Group, including BES                      A4.11.1

Finance. The Audit Committee is composed of three non-executive directors qualified as independent: José
Manuel Ruivo da Pena, Luís António Burnay Pinto de Carvalho Daun e Lorena and João de Faria Rodrigues.

BES Finance complies with its country’s of incorporation corporate governance regime(s).                               A4.11.2



Business
BES Finance is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (‘‘BES’’). BES Finance has no                   A4.7.1

subsidiaries. The objects for which BES Finance was established are unrestricted and include, pursuant to              A4.7.2

clause 3 of its Memorandum of Association, without limitation, ‘‘to carry on the business of a finance and             A14.14.2.1

investment company’’, ‘‘to receive monies on deposit or loan and to borrow or raise money in any currency              A4.6.1

with or without security’’, ‘‘to advance, deposit or lend money, securities and/or property’’, ‘‘to buy, sell, broke   A4.12.1

and deal in foreign exchange, bullion, specie, precious metal and minerals, and all other commodities’’, ‘‘to
enter into currency and/or interest rate and any other type of swap agreements’’, ‘‘to act as promoters and
entrepreneurs’’, ‘‘to exercise and enforce all rights and powers conferred by or incidental to the ownership of
any shares, stock, obligations or other securities’’, ‘‘to purchase or otherwise acquire, to sell, exchange,
surrender, lease, mortgage, charge, convert, turn to account, dispose of and deal with real and personal property
and rights of all kinds’’, ‘‘to stand surety for or to guarantee, support or secure the performance of all or any of
the obligations of any person, firm or company whether or not related or affiliated to the company in any
manner’’, ‘‘to engage in or carry on any other lawful trade, business or enterprise’’.

Capitalisation and Indebtedness
The existing issued ordinary shares of BES Finance are not listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange or on
any other stock exchange and are not dealt on any other recognised market.




                                                       203
Two Ordinary Shares were issued and fully paid when BES Finance was incorporated on 15th November,                                        A4.14.1.1

1996. A further 24,998 Ordinary Shares were issued on 21st January, 1997. The share capital of BES Finance
was subsequently redenominated in euro and its authorised share capital increased by various special
resolutions to its current level of €600,100,000 consisting of 100,000 Ordinary Shares of par value €1.00
each and 600,000 Non-cumulative Guaranteed Step-Up Preference Shares Series A of a par value of €1,000
each.
All issued Ordinary Shares are credited as fully paid and are held by BES as at the date of this Prospectus.                              A4.7.1

Through its shareholding BES directly controls BES Finance. There are no other measures in place
concerning such control.
No capital of BES Finance is under option or is agreed conditionally or unconditionally to be put under                                   A4.12.1

option.
The following table sets forth, at 30th June, 2010 the capitalisation of BES Finance. This table should be
read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto of BES Finance which are incorporated
by reference into this Prospectus. Save as disclosed below there has been no material change in the
captitalisation of BES Finance since 30th June, 2010.

                                                                     (Expressed in thousand Euro)
                                                    30th June,(*) 31st December,       30th June,(*) 31st December,
                                                          2010              2009             2009             2008
Shareholder’s Equity
100,000 shares of €1 par value
  each, fully authorised, subscribed
  and paid up                                                100                    100                    100                      100
600,000 pref shares of €1.000
  par value each, fully authorised,
  subscribed and paid up                             600,000               600,000                600,000                600,000
Retained earnings – prior                             35,829                36,469                 36,469                 26,766
Reserves                                               2,097                 2,097                  2,097                  2,097
Dividends distributed                                (33,480)              (33,480)               (33,480)               (33,480)
Net Income                                            22,158                32,839                 15,783                 43,184
                                                   —————                 —————                  —————                  —————
Total Shareholder’s Equity                           626,704               638,025                620,969                638,667

                   (3)
Short term debt [par value]
                                                   ————— ————— ————— —————
                                                    2,275,020             1,100,000              2,485,376              2,465,563
Long term debt(3) [par value]                       6,564,100             4,986,126              4,067,365              5,171,858
Long term borrowings(3) [par value]                 6,564,100             4,986,126              4,067,365              5,171,858
  Subordinated debt(3) [par value]                  1,020,000             1,420,000              1,420,000              1,720,000
  Corporate debt(3) [par value]                     5,544,100             3,566,126              2,647,365              3,451,858
                                                   —————                 —————                  —————                  —————
Total short and Long term debt

Notes:
                                                   ————— ————— ————— —————
                                                    8,839,120             6,086,126              6,552,741              7,637,421


(1) The main notes issued after 30th June, 2010:
     1    Euro 300,000,000 Fixed Rate Notes due 2046 were issued on 12th July, 2010.
     2    Euro 100,000,000 Fixed Rate Notes due 2012 were issued on 2nd August, 2010.
     3    Euro 300,000,000 Fixed Rate Notes due 2047 were issued on 24th September, 2010.
     4    Euro 34,000,000 Fixed Rate Notes due 2015 were issued on 18th October, 2010.
(2) Save as set out in footnote (1), there has been no material change in the capitalisation of the Issuer since 30th June, 2010.
(3) Short and Long term debt are included in the Issuer’s financial statements, prepared in accordance with International Financial
    Reporting Standards, at amortized cost except for certain notes containing embedded derivatives which are at estimated market
    value. These specific captions per the financial statements amount to €1,489,931,016 and €119,463,361, respectively.
(*) Unaudited figures.




                                                                 204
Financial Information of BES Finance
The following tables present the balance sheet and statement of income of BES Finance as at 30th June, 2010   A13.5.1

and 30th June, 2009 and for the years ended 31st December, 2009 and 2008 and the statement of cash flows      A13.5.2

of BES Finance for the period ended 30th June, 2010 and 31st December, 2009 and 2008. The information         A4.13.1

for the years ended 31st December, 2009 and 2008 has been extracted without material adjustment from, and
should be read in conjunction with, the audited financial statements of BES Finance for the years ended
31st December, 2009 and 2008, together with the notes thereto, all of which are incorporated by reference
into this Prospectus. The financial information as at 30th June, 2010 and 30th June, 2009 is unaudited.

BES Finance Ltd.

Balance Sheet                                                                                                   A4.13.1
                                                                                                                A4.13.5.1
                                             30th June, 31st December,         30th June, 31st December,
                                                  2010             2009             2009             2008
                                            (Expressed       (Expressed       (Expressed       (Expressed
                                               in Euro)         in Euro)         in Euro)         in Euro)
Assets
Deposits with banks                          1,973,436           415,012         367,606          448,222
Financial assets held for trading          223,081,378        77,756,061      92,588,148      102,927,942
Loans and advances to banks              7,983,797,801     6,443,303,803   7,174,419,608    8,313,883,847
Derivatives for risk management
  purposes                                  14,155,211           968,044       1,381,229       29,499,366
                                         ——————            ——————          ——————           ——————
Total assets                             8,223,007,826     6,522,442,920   7,268,756,591    8,446,759,377

Liabilities
                                         —————— —————— —————— ——————
Financial liabilities held for trading     223,081,377        77,756,061      92,588,148      102,927,942
Deposits from banks                        110,918,144        44,831,362      45,840,941       46,801,277
Debt securities issued                   5,795,540,355     3,964,639,778   4,694,983,546    5,818,071,126
Derivatives for risk management
  purposes                                     923,076           336,977               –        1,154,401
Subordinated debt                        1,434,185,547     1,791,661,111   1,778,149,339    1,827,941,940
Other liabilities                           31,655,814         5,192,281      36,225,352       11,196,069
                                         ——————            ——————          ——————           ——————
Total liabilities                        7,596,304,313     5,884,417,570   6,647,787,326    7,808,092,755

Equity
                                         —————— —————— —————— ——————
Share capital                              600,100,000       600,100,000     600,100,000      600,100,000
Other reserves and retained earnings         4,445,350         5,086,622       5,086,622       (4,616,929)
Profit for the year                         22,158,163        32,838,728      15,782,643       43,183,551
Total equity                               626,703,513       638,025,350     620,969,265      638,666,622
                                         ——————            ——————          ——————           ——————
Total liabilities and equity             8,223,007,826     6,522,442,920   7,268,756,591    8,446,759,377
                                         —————— —————— —————— ——————




                                                     205
BES Finance Ltd.

Income statement
                                            30th June, 31st December,         30th June, 31st December,
                                                 2010             2009             2009             2008
                                           (Expressed       (Expressed       (Expressed       (Expressed
                                              in Euro)         in Euro)         in Euro)         in Euro)
Interest and similar income               141,361,359  262,581,645  146,873,725  515,876,615
Interest expense and similar charges      122,969,099  230,581,433  130,683,886  479,113,508
                                         —————— —————— —————— ——————
Net interest income                        18,392,260   32,000,212   16,189,839   36,763,107
                                         —————— —————— —————— ——————
Fee and commission income                           –            4            –            –
Fee and commission expense                    (18,281)     (40,957)     (20,680)     (36,385)
Net gains/(losses) from financial
  assets and liabilities at fair value
  through profit or loss                    3,185,403          369,339        (412,479)       8,253,353
Net (losses)/gains from foreign
  exchange differences                   612,849               541,047         625,531        (650,747)
Other operating income and expense           (68)               (9,704)         (1,288)         (2,728)
                                    ——————                ——————          ——————          ——————
Operating income                      22,172,163            32,859,941      16,380,923      44,326,600
                                    ——————                ——————          ——————          ——————
General and administrative expenses       14,000                21,213         598,280       1,143,049
                                    ——————                ——————          ——————          ——————
Operating expenses                        14,000                21,213         598,280       1,143,049
                                    ——————                ——————          ——————          ——————
Profit for the year                   22,158,163            32,838,728      15,782,643      43,183,551
                                         —————— —————— —————— ——————




                                                    206
BES Finance Ltd.

Statement of cash flows
                                                            30th June,(*) 31st December, 31st December,
                                                                 2010                2009           2008
                                                           (Expressed          (Expressed     (Expressed
                                                              in Euro)            in Euro)       in Euro)
Operating activities
Interest received                                         140,053,972   281,057,379   511,581,689
Interest paid                                            (146,006,082) (202,535,546) (474,300,569)
Taxes and licences                                                (68)       (9,704)       (2,728)
Foreign currency exchange gains / (losses)                    612,849       541,047      (650,747)
Operating expenses paid                                    (3,863,345)   (5,696,615)    6,121,717
                                                        —————— —————— ——————
                                                           (9,202,674)   73,356,561    42,749,362
                                                        —————— —————— ——————
Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Loans and advances to banks                             (1,539,186,614) 1,852,104,310   1,546,675,436
Short and long term debt                                 1,862,518,637 (1,883,013,134) (1,560,749,785)
Derivatives for risk management purposes                   (12,601,066)    27,713,898       6,841,683
                                                        —————— —————— ——————
Cash flow from operating activities                        301,528,283     70,161,635      35,516,696
                                                        —————— —————— ——————
Cash flow from investment activities
Subordinated debt                                        (299,969,859) (36,714,845) (1,962,199)
                                                        —————— —————— ——————
Cash flow from operating activities                      (299,969,859) (36,714,845) (1,962,199)
                                                        —————— —————— ——————
Cash flow from financing activities
Dividends distributed                                             –      (33,480,000) (33,480,000)
                                                        ——————          —————— ——————
Cash flow from financing activities                               –      (33,480,000) (33,480,000)
                                                        ——————          —————— ——————
Net increase in cash and cash equivalents                 1,558,424          (33,210)      74,497
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year              415,012          448,222      373,725
                                                        ——————          —————— ——————
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year                  1,973,436          415,012      448,222
                                                        —————— —————— ——————
Selected Financial Information of BES Finance
The following table presents selected financial information of BES Finance as at 30th June, 2010 and
30th June, 2009 and for the years ended 31st December, 2009 and 31st December, 2008.

BES Finance Ltd.
                                          30th June,        30th June, 31st December, 31st December,
                                               2010              2009           2009           2008
Total Assets                           8,223,007,826    7,268,756,591    6,522,442,920    8,446,759,377

Total Liabilities
                                      —————— —————— —————— ——————
                                       7,596,304,313    6,647,787,326    5,884,417,570    7,808,092,755

Total Equity
                                      —————— —————— —————— ——————
                                        626,703,513       620,969,265     638,025,350       638,666,622

Total Liabilities and Equity
                                      —————— —————— —————— ——————
                                       8,223,007,826    7,268,756,591    6,522,442,920    8,446,759,377
                                      —————— —————— —————— ——————


                                                  207
                BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A. AND BES GROUP

BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO S.A.
Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (“BES”) is a bank incorporated in Portugal (with commercial registry and tax          A6.3

payer number 500 852 367) on 26th September, 1990 for an unlimited duration and with limited liability           A11.4.1.1

(sociedade anónima). The share capital of BES is €3,499,999,998 and is represented by 1,166,666,666 book-        A11.4.1.2

entry nominative shares with the nominal value of €3 each.                                                       A11.4.1.3
                                                                                                                 A11.4.1.4
According to the Portuguese Banks association, BES is Portugal’s second-largest private financial institution    A11.5.1.4
by total consolidated assets. BES and its consolidated subsidiaries (together, the “BES Group” or the            A11.6.1
“Group”) offer a full range of banking and financial services, including deposit taking, lending, asset
management, leasing and factoring, investment banking and brokerage services. As at 31st December, 2009,
the BES Group operated 799 retail branches, 21 private banking centres (20 in Portugal and one in Angola)
and 36 corporate banking centres (26 in Portugal, eight in Spain and two in Angola) and employed 9,359
people worldwide.

1.    History
BES’ origins date from 1869, when José Maria do Espírito Santo e Silva, along with other investors, founded
its predecessor bank in Lisbon. After the Second World War, BES became one of Portugal’s largest
commercial banks under the direction and leadership of the Espírito Santo family. In 1975, virtually all
institutions in the banking and insurance industries, including BES, were nationalised by the Portuguese
government. The Espírito Santo family, deprived of its Portuguese base, began operations outside of
Portugal, primarily in the financial services market.
In 1986, the Portuguese government embarked upon a privatisation programme, creating the conditions for
the return of the Espírito Santo Group to Portugal. After banking activities were again opened to private
initiative, the Espírito Santo Group, under a strategic partnership with Crédit Agricole S.A. and supported by
a core group of Portuguese shareholders, set up Banco Internacional de Crédito (“BIC”), thus marking the
Espírito Santo Group’s return to Portugal. That same year, the Espírito Santo Group acquired Espírito Santo
Sociedade de Investimento (the precursor of BES Investimento), with the participation of Union de Banques
Suisses and Kredietbank (Luxembourg), among other financial institutions.
In 1991, BES (formerly incorporated in Portugal as BESCL) was re-privatised and ESFG and Crédit
Agricole acquired stakes in its share capital. As of 30th June, 2010, ESFG and its subsidiaries held 42.99 per
cent. of the voting rights in BES and consolidated BES in its financial statements. Crédit Agricole is a
shareholder investor in BES and is ESFG’s strategic partner in BES’ management and operation, particularly
in connection with the development of products in the retail sector. There are no written arrangements
governing this relationship.
During the 1990s, BES’ business expanded both geographically and by type of activity as a result of several
investments. In 1992, BES purchased Banco Industrial del Mediterráneo (later Banco Espírito Santo (Spain))
and expanded its activity in the Spanish market, where its presence was reinforced in 2000, following the
acquisition of Benito y Monjardín and GES Capital.
In line with the internationalisation of its activities, in 2000, an important strategic partnership was
established with the Bradesco Group in Brazil, leading to BES’ acquisition of 3.25 per cent. of Bradesco and
Bradesco’s acquisition of 3 per cent. of BES. In 2009, and following BES share capital increase, Bradesco
increased its stake in BES to 6.05 per cent. At the end of 2009, the BES Group held 2.78 per cent. of the
share capital and 4.98 per cent. of the share capital with voting rights of Banco Bradesco S.A. In addition,
both groups established joint holdings in BES Investimento do Brasil and BES Securities in Brazil.
Investments in the Americas reached the United States, where BES acquired Espírito Santo Bank, a bank
mainly focused on private banking and directed to customers in Latin America, particularly in Brazil. In the
same year, a strategic partnership was established in Portugal with Portugal Telecom, which led to the
establishment of Banco BEST – Banco Electrónico de Serviço Total in 2001.




                                                     208
Within the scope of the BES Group’s international expansion policy, in 2002 BES acquired Bank Espírito
Santo International, Limited. In the same year, BES acquired 45 per cent. in Locarent, a rent-a-car business,
through a strategic partnership with Caixa Geral de Depósitos (“CGD”) and Serfingest, SGPS.
In 2004, Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (Spain) and Hypovereinsbank (“HVB group”) entered into an agreement
for the acquisition of the total share capital of Banco Inversión (Spain) by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (Spain),
a transaction that was authorised by the Bank of Spain at the beginning of 2005 and executed during that year.
In September 2005, BES announced the merger by integration of BIC, which was concluded in December
2005.
In October 2005, BES Investimento together with Concordia Sp.z. o.o. (“Concordia”), a company based in
Warsaw, Poland that specialises in providing financial advisory services, established a strategic partnership
for the incorporation of Concordia Espírito Santo Investment (“CESI”), a company that will operate in the
Polish market focusing on the provision of advisory services in project finance, mergers and acquisitions and
other areas of corporate finance.
In February 2006, BES’ Board of Directors decided to acquire a shareholding of 50 per cent. in Companhia
de Seguros Tranquilidade-Vida and the sale of a 15 per cent. shareholding in Espírito Santo Companhia de
Seguros, S.A., both transactions concluded on 27th June, 2006. Both companies changed their names to BES
Vida, Companhia de Seguros (“BES Vida”) and BES, Companhia de Seguros (“BES Seguros”), respectively.
In April 2006, BES launched a capital increase in the form of a rights offering of up to 150 million ordinary
shares at a subscription price of €9.20 per share. Total proceeds of this transaction amounted to €1.38 billion.
The purpose of the capital increase was to allow for the reinforcement of BES’ competitive position in
Portugal and to sustain an international expansion focused on Spain, Angola and Brazil.
In May 2007, BES announced the conclusion of a merger by incorporation of its Spanish subsidiary (Banco
Espírito Santo (Spain)) into BES, with the objective of achieving greater operating efficiency through
economies of scale and to increase activity in the Spanish corporate market.
In March 2008, BES Angola established a strategic partnership with ESAF termed “BESAACTIF”, the first
fund management firm to operate in Angola. Also in March of 2008, ESFG entered into an agreement with
Portugal Telecom to acquire 34 per cent. of the share capital of Banco BEST.
On 31st December, 2008, BES announced the conclusion of a merger by incorporation of Besleasing e
Factoring, Instituição Financeira de Crédito, S.A, into BES.
On 16th March, 2009, the General Meeting approved the proposal to increase the Bank’s share capital to
€3,499,999,998.00 through the issue of 666,666,666 new shares. The €1.2 billion capital increase was
concluded in April. The market showed strong demand for the BES shares, with subscription volume
reaching 926 million shares, corresponding to 138.9 per cent. of the shares issued.
In August 2009, the Bank informed the market of the creation of a holding company, AVISTAR SGPS, SA
with €100,000,000 in capital, fully subscribed by the Bank. The holding, incorporated in Portugal, retains
the main strategic stakes held by the Bank, namely Portugal Telecom, SA, EDP, SA and Banco Bradesco,
SA.
In November 2009 the Bank informed the market that it had celebrated an agreement to acquire 40 per cent.
of the capital of Aman Bank for Commerce and Investment Stock Company (“Aman Bank”), a privately
owned Bank in Libya with registered office in Tripoli.
In December 2009, the Bank sold 24 per cent. of the share capital of BES Angola to Portmill, Investimentos
e Telecomunicações, S.A., an Angolan investor, for U.S.$375,000,000 (approx. €254.2 million). As a result
of this disposal, the Bank now holds 51.94 per cent. of the share capital of BES Angola.

2.    Strategy
The BES Group is pursuing an organic growth strategy by developing its banking activity and providing a            A11.5.1.3

comprehensive range of financial products and services with the fundamental objectives of creating value for
its shareholders while simultaneously meeting the needs of clients and employees. Additionally, it may
pursue small acquisitions outside Portugal that can compliment and strengthen the BES Group’s


                                                      209
international presence. BES seeks to accomplish these objectives within the framework of its overall duty of
social responsibility. The BES Group aims to provide excellent service and focus on the specific needs of
each client, acting as a multi-specialist financial group serving differentiated segments of individual,
corporate and institutional clients. Specific strategies that the BES Group is undertaking to meet its
objectives include the following.

Increasing its domestic market share
BES plans on organically growing market share in both the retail and corporate segments by securing new
clients through the offer of differentiated value alternatives for each segment, continuing its cross-selling
initiatives to existing clients and leveraging existing services and products such as assurfinance and
bancassurance.

Deepen its strong commitment to customer service
BES prides itself on its strong customer service and believes that this has been a driving force in its            A11.5.1.4

substantial growth in market share over the past 10 years. In 2001 BES was at the forefront of the national
financial sector, creating a Service Quality Department.
The quality management structure is headed by the Executive Committee, which establishes and approves
the main commitments and objectives regarding service levels and service quality to deliver to the Client.
The Executive Committee is supported by the Service Quality Department, which, through the IT,
Operations, Quality and Costs Committee, reports on the global evolution of quality and service levels
indicators, terms of both in the service provided to the clients and that provided by the Bank’s central areas
to its commercial areas.
However, BES believes that further advances in this area can still be achieved. It intends to accomplish this
through a deepening of existing client relationships, greater reliance on technological innovation (providing
BES with more efficient ways to meet customer needs), increased cross-selling (providing customers with
one-stop shopping for their various financial needs) and tailoring its approach to different client segments to
address the needs and expectations of those segments.

Continue its targeted international expansion
BES’ international expansion strategy is focused on geographies with cultural and economic affinities with
Portugal, particularly in Angola, Brazil and Spain. In both Angola and Spain, BES’ activity focuses on
corporate and investment banking as well as on services to high-net worth retail and private banking clients,
segments where BES has developed competitive know-how as a result of its domestic business. In Brazil,
BES is present through its investment banking unit and through a strategic partnership with Banco Bradesco.
This strategy provides BES a competitive advantage in supporting Portuguese companies with the
development of their international activities, including among other things, in financing their participation in
trade flows among its target markets, which have been increasing and show potential for increasing further.
Several Portuguese-speaking countries present significant growth opportunities, due to their wealth in terms
of natural resources, their economic and demographic growth potential and opportunities in infrastructure
development. For example, the past 10 years have seen high levels of development in Brazil, with strong
consumption growth, prudent fiscal and monetary management and the achievement of investment-grade
status by Standard & Poor’s for the country’s sovereign debt (a designation given to countries or companies
with a credit rating higher than BBB- by Standard & Poor’s and Fitch or higher than Baa3 by Moody’s
Investor Services). BES believes Angola also shows significant potential, among other things, due to its oil
and other natural resources and potential for infrastructure development. Other areas, such as North Africa
and the Mediterranean basin, also present further growth opportunities. BES believes that it is uniquely
positioned to play a leading role in trade flows and infrastructure development between these regions and
Portugal and Spain, and it intends to increase its presence in these regions in order to participate in the
expected growth of these countries. In November 2009 BES set up an investment company – BES África –
which will be dedicated to coordinating BES Group’s equity investments in Africa.
Economic growth potential, cultural affinities with Portugal and geographic proximity are some of the main
criteria for the selection of markets for investment.




                                                      210
Continued focus on obtaining further efficiencies
Despite BES’ strong position in operational efficiency, BES believes that further gains are achievable.
Among other things, BES has implemented various cost-reduction initiatives, including in advertising,
variable compensation, rationalisation initiatives in its Spanish operations, merger by incorporation of
Besleasing e Factoring into BES, as well as in other administrative areas. BES’ branch expansion strategy
since 2006 has focused on low-cost branch formats (most of the branches opened have one or two employees
– especially within the framework of the assurfinance programme with Companhia de Seguros
Tranquilidade) and has mainly targeted regions with greater purchasing power. These commercial units have
an initial investment and cost level that is 48 per cent. below traditional formats and a business plan which
aims for the branch to break even during its second year of activity and go on to recover BES’ initial
investment within a four-year period. By 2012, branches opened since 2006 will reach maturity and their
respective cost-to-income ratios will improve.

Further strengthen its strategic partnerships.
The BES Group seeks to further strengthen its strategic partnerships in the long term. For example, BES
maintains an important strategic partnership with Crédit Agricole, a leading European bank and main
shareholder of the BES Group. This collaboration has helped to implement key cross-selling platforms, such
as bancassurance. Additionally, BES maintains an important strategic partnership with Banco Bradesco, a
leading Brazilian bank and also a BES shareholder. For example, Banco Bradesco is a 20 per cent.
shareholder in BES Investimento do Brasil, BES’ Brazilian investment banking subsidiary, and provides
support and local know-how to BES’ operations in Brazil, which is a key growth market for BES’
international expansion strategy.

Deepen its commitment to social responsibility
Supported by a sustainability oriented management, Banco Espírito Santo Group continuously and
consistently engages in the various dimensions of sustainability, not only in the development of its core
business, but also by supporting the community in non financial areas, thus holding a pioneering role at
various levels:
•     first Portuguese financial group to subscribe to the Equator Principles;
•     the only Portuguese bank to be included in the FTSE4Good sustainability index, the acclaimed
      sustainability index, reinforcing its positioning as a socially responsible institution;
•     first Portuguese company to endorse the Business&Biodiversity declaration, developing an
      unprecedented strategy within the national financial sector in the preservation of biodiversity;
•     making available to its clients a portfolio of 60 funds, selected in accordance with a set of
      environmental, social and ethical criteria;
•     fifth largest financer in the world of renewable energies investment projects;
•     Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento (“BESI”) reached the first place in the world in financial
      consulting in the renewable energies sector according to the “Infrastructure Journal”;
•     Banco Espírito Santo was awarded the Companies and Organizations Citizenship Prize 2009 for its
      work in the field of sustainability, and as the national banking institution with the best performance
      in combining social, environmental and economic issues.

3.     Business Segments
BES Group develops its activity supported by value propositions aimed at meeting the needs of its clients:         A11.5.1.1

companies, institutions and individual clients. Its decision-making centre is located in Portugal, which is also
its main market of operation.
The historic links with Africa and South America, notably with Brazil, the internationalisation of Portuguese
companies, the growing interdependence of economies, and the large communities of Portuguese nationals
established across various continents have provided the basis for BES Group to expand its international




                                                      211
structure, and to adapt it to provide relevant services to those communities, with a positive impact on overall
activity.
In monitoring performance by business area, the Group considers the following operational Segments:
•     Domestic Commercial Banking, which includes the Retail, Corporate, Institutional, and Private
      Banking sub-segments
•     International Commercial Banking
•     Investment Banking
•     Asset Management
•     Markets and Strategic Investments
•     Corporate Centre
•     Others – consists of the remaining BES Group activities (including the BES Group’s insurance
      activities consolidated under the equity method) which individually represent less than 10 per cent. of
      total consolidated assets or net income and together represent less than 25 per cent. of those items.
Each segment is supported by directly dedicated structures, as well as by the units of the Group whose
activity is most closely related to each of these segments. These structures run individual and autonomous
monitoring of each operational unit of the Group (from an investment centre perspective) while the
Executive Committee defines strategies and commercial plans for each Operating Segment.
As a complement to this, there is a second segmentation of activity and results according to geographical
criteria, separating the performance of the units located in Portugal (Domestic Area) from that achieved by
the units abroad (International Area).

Domestic Commercial Banking
Banking Segment Overview
Since its privatisation in 1992 BES Group has followed a clear and consistent strategy of organic growth in       A11.5.1.4

the domestic market, developing an approach based on a multispecialist model. Through this growth strategy,
backed by a solid franchise and strong commercial growth in the individual and corporate client segments,
the Group has been able to achieve sustained market share gains. Its average market share more than doubled
between 1992 and 2009, rising from 8.5 per cent. to 21.2 per cent.
The BES Group is the second largest provider of financial services in Portugal in terms of total consolidated
assets (according to the Portuguese Banking Association) and has a diversified distribution network
consisting of branches, corporate centres and private banking centres to serve customers in various countries,
with a strategic focus on the countries of the Atlantic basin (Portugal, Spain, Angola and Brazil). Based on
publicly available data, the BES Group believes that, in 2009, it had an average market share in the
Portuguese banking market of approximately 21.2 per cent. (as compared to 20.7 per cent. in 2008). The BES
Group’s customer base is diversified and is comprised of individuals, small to medium-sized businesses,
public sector institutions, Portuguese subsidiaries of foreign corporations and large corporations. Reflecting
this diverse client base, the corporate and retail banking segment included the following business lines as at
31st December, 2009:

Retail Banking
The retail banking business line serves four main sub-segments:
•     High-Net Worth Retail Clients (“BES 360”) – individual clients with amounts in excess of €50,000
      and up to €500,000 in assets under management with the BES Group, plus clients that potentially may
      so qualify (e.g. doctors, engineers and other professionals with less than €50,000 in assets under
      management with the BES Group).
•     Business Clients – small enterprises and sole proprietorships with turnover of less than €2.5 million
      per year.




                                                     212
•       Mass-Market Retail Clients – individual clients with less than €50,000 in assets under management
        with the BES Group.
•       Private Banking Clients – individual clients with more than €500,000 of assets under management.

Corporate Banking
The corporate banking business line serves three main sub-segments:
•       Middle Market Corporate Clients – enterprises with turnover between €2.5 million and €50 million
        per year.
•       Large Corporate Clients – enterprises with consolidated annual turnover in excess of €50 million.
•       Municipalities and Institutional Clients – private companies owned by municipalities, public and
        privately held foundations and professional associations.

Strategic Focus
The BES Group’s strategy for its Corporate and Retail Banking segment is to provide distinct value
propositions for its corporate and retail clients, while addressing their specifically identified needs. In order
to achieve these goals, the BES Group has sought to strengthen its position within the Portuguese banking
sector by:

(i)     differentiating the BES Group from its competitors by offering tailored business solutions;

(ii)    increasing client acquisition levels through unique initiatives such as assurfinance (the BES Group’s
        partnership programme with insurance company Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade); and

(iii)   increasing the penetration of its existing client base, while reducing product churn, through enhanced
        customer service and product innovation.

In order to increase product and service penetration of its existing client base, the BES Group has sought to
take advantage of potential synergies among its banking units and other subsidiaries. For example, ESFG’s
and Crédit Agricole’s Portuguese insurance subsidiaries distribute insurance, investment and other financial
products through BES Group branches. In doing so, the BES Group has increasingly focused on the retail
sector as a means of promoting greater cross-selling of fee-generating financial services. The BES Group has
also engaged in a programme of modernising and reconfiguring existing branches using a segment-oriented
approach and in training its sales force to better address the needs of clients.

Retail Banking
The BES Group’s approach to the Retail Banking segment is that of a single-brand branch network, serving
its three main sub-segments (high-net worth clients, business clients and mass-market retail clients),
representing in total 1.9 million clients and €34.6 billion of credit and funds extended to such clients (as at
31st December, 2009). The Retail Banking segment is organised along two divisions: regions and
subsegments. The Retail Banking segment includes two commercial departments that are sub-divided into
34 universal regional units (which manage the local branches) and into 20 high-net worth client regional
units (which manage the account managers of high-net worth clients in the branches). Additionally, the BES
Group has three dedicated marketing units (one for each of the main sub-segments). The BES Group seeks
to consolidate its position as a leading provider of banking and financial services to high-net worth retail
clients by providing them with specialised advice from 501 dedicated account managers as well as offering
them exclusive products, financial solutions and financial planning services. The services available to
business clients (including sole proprietorships) are tailored to meet their specific needs, supported by the
creation of a specialised marketing unit and a network of 269 account managers. The approach to mass-
market retail clients includes a marketing unit focused on sales leads, the definition of clear business
practices and high standards for the client representatives in the branch network, the reinforcement of the
assurfinance programme and fine-tuning of the commercial approach to specific types of clientele within this
segment.

The BES Group’s value proposition to high-net worth retail clients, in its BES 360º sub-segment, consists of
a differentiated service which satisfies clients’ financial requirements and risk profiles, based on high


                                                      213
standards of quality and continuous follow-up by specialised account managers via exclusively tailored
solutions, designed for the specific needs of such high-net worth clients. BES 360º offers financial advisory
services (through Map 360º, a unique and integrated financial planning tool to support clients in their key
financial decisions, such as retirement planning, asset management, education and home finance) based on
an assessment of the financial profile of the customer, in order to determine an investment recommendation
that is best suited to the customer’s profile.

This service presents significant advantages for clients and reinforces the BES Group’s strong competence
in financial advisory services and has lead to the BES Group achieving significant market share within
certain professions (e.g. physicians, where the BES Group estimates its market share to exceed 45 per cent.).
With respect to businesses, including sole proprietorships, the BES Group aims to achieve a market
leadership position. In order to achieve this goal in a highly competitive market, the BES Group has
developed a distinctive value proposition that internalises four key principles when designing and
customising products for tailored business solutions. These four key principles are:

•      selective growth in pre-determined strategic sectors (identified via their critical mass and risk-adjusted
       profitability metrics);

•      pricing policies based on selected risk metrics;

•      selective cross-selling of products, especially with respect to Treasury management; and

•      integrated approach to the owner-enterprise relationship, with particular focus on retirement and
       succession planning.

The BES Group’s value proposition has produced notable results: strategic sectors (such as public notaries,
pharmacies and healthcare) accounted for 56 per cent. of client acquisitions in this sub-segment in 2009.
Moreover, the BES Group estimates that it has significant market share in this sub-segment, notably an 83 per
cent. market share amongst public notaries, 56 per cent. amongst pharmacies and 51 per cent. amongst the
small-business healthcare sector. With respect to mass-market retail clients, the BES Group’s strategy is based
on two strategic axes: a focused client orientation and a focused commercial proactiveness and accountability.
With respect to commercial proactiveness and accountability, the BES Group has developed internal tools to
track products sold by customer representatives over a specified timeframe and how this compares to the
particular customer’s objective. Such tools have had a significant impact on sales productivity since 2006: for
example, in 2009, less than two per cent. of sales assistants did not reach 50 per cent. of their sales targets (as
compared to 31 per cent. of sales assistants in 2006) and all branch managers reached their sales targets (as
compared to 51 per cent. of branch managers in 2006). Moreover, the BES Group continues to focus on
developing innovative ways to increase market share, notably through proactive evaluation and exploration of
emerging client acquisition opportunities and through an innovative product portfolio, including savings
products and products oriented towards day-to-day financial management. Additionally, the BES Group
focuses on effective communication of its brand strategy and product portfolio, a key lever in the BES Group’s
                                                                                                                      A11.5.1.4
success in the mass-market retail sub-segment. During 2009, for example, the BES Group was among the top
10 most familiar corporate brands in Portugal, according to Marktest/Publivaga Recordação Publicitária
Espontânea Genérica. A significant client acquisition initiative is the assurfinance programme, the result of a
strategic relationship between the BES Group and Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade. Assurfinance seeks
to capture Tranquilidade clients who do not have banking relationships with the BES Group. This programme
offers Tranquilidade agents the ability to cross-sell a wide array of BES Group products (from insurance to
banking), custom tailored to the necessities of Tranquilidade’s clients.

The BES Group’s approach to the Retail Banking segment also includes the development of specific value
propositions to address emerging demographic trends in Portugal, such as residential tourists and growing
immigrant populations. The private banking unit, moreover, serves a universe of clients with €7.6 billion of
total assets under management (as at 31st December, 2009) through 20 private banking centres across
Portugal. Private banking clients are organised into four sub-sets: top private (served by a dedicated
commercial team), executive professionals, entrepreneurs and traditional high-wealth clients. All private
banking regional units have team leaders focused on executive professionals, entrepreneurs and traditional
high-wealth clients. The Private Banking unit offers a differentiated service based on a holistic view of the


                                                       214
client, focusing on investment solutions which satisfy the clients’ financial and wealth-management needs.
The development of a relationship based on trust is a key pillar of the Private Banking unit, accomplished
via 77 private managers with high technical and relationship skills. Private Banking aims to offer
independent advice tailored to the client’s risk profile, coupled with excellent client service. In this sub-
segment, the BES Group has developed several “member-to-member” initiatives, both in Portugal and at the
international private banking level, directed to Portuguese residents abroad. Additionally, an increasingly
closer co-operation with the investment banking business of the BES Group allows the private banking unit
to offer products and services that are particularly desired by its larger or more sophisticated clients, such as
discretionary management, brokerage, structured credit, private equity, fixed income and structured
portfolios, derivatives and financial advisory services.

Corporate Banking
The Corporate Banking segment maintains a vocation to serve and add value to the activities and enterprises
of Portuguese companies. This segment serves over 18,000 clients with a total of €28.6 billion of credit and
funds extended to such clients (as at 31st December, 2009) through 26 corporate centres in Portugal and a
team of 130 dedicated account managers (for middle market corporate clients) and two pools of 17 account
managers for large corporate clients (in Lisbon and Oporto). The BES Group seeks to maintain a market
leading position based on specialised client service and by continuously striving to offer tailored business
products, with a special emphasis on stimulating innovation and supporting the internationalisation of
Portuguese companies, leveraging the multi-specialist organisational model of the Group and its
international presence.
In 2008, for example, the International Premium Unit was established with a view to assisting companies
with the most potential for internationalisation and the development of foreign trade. The International
Premium Unit has a team of international managers with strong experience in corporate banking and
international trade. This team, in coordination with the BES Group’s international network, provides full
services to its clients, both in terms of new-market advisory as well as advising and executing on
international trade transactions. The value proposition developed for the Corporate segment is focused on
diversifying revenue sources through the cross-selling of specialised products and services, for example, risk
management products, investment banking advisory services, insurance and, in particular, trade finance as
the BES Group benefits from its strong commercial presence in the export sector. In specialised credit
(leasing and factoring) 2009 represented the first year of activity following the merger by integration of
Besleasing e Factoring into BES. The year’s results confirm that the integration resulted in a very efficient
approach to the business, with market share gains being achieved in both leasing (from 18 per cent. to 20 per
cent.) and factoring (from 19 per cent. to 21 per cent.).
Institutional clients (municipalities, municipal companies, universities, public hospitals and social solidarity
institutions) also benefit from specialised teams. This area of the Corporate Banking division focuses on, for
example, long-term investment financing and providing treasury management services, while also focusing
on the cross-selling of business products. The BES Group regularly engages in capital markets activities,
including proprietary trading activities, in the normal course of business. The BES Group’s capital markets
activities include equity trading as well as interest rate, credit and foreign exchange trading, using both cash
and derivative instruments. Capital markets activities undertaken by the BES Group are taken worldwide,
with particular significance in the Eurozone, the United Kingdom, the United States and Brazil. Although
the BES Group’s capital markets activities have been affected by the current financial crisis, capital markets
results continued to generate positive trading results in 2008.

Distribution Channels
In Portugal, the BES Group offers a co-ordinated “multi-channel” approach to its clients: (i) physical access
points to BES via a single brand network of 734 branches, focused mainly on retail clients, 20 private
banking specialised centres and 26 corporate centres; (ii) 1,775 assurfinance agents who are focused
primarily on client acquisition (see “– Strategic Partnerships and Cross-selling Arrangements”); and (iii)
direct channels, such as real-estate agents, post offices, the internet, 3G mobile phones, telephone and SMS.
Additionally, the BES Group provides a full range of banking and related financial services in Spain (26
branches and eight specialised corporate centres), in Angola through its subsidiary Banco Espírito Santo



                                                      215
Angola, SARL (34 branches, two corporate centres, one private banking specialised centre and one
investment banking office) and in Brazil, in addition to its presence in other countries through its
international branches and representative offices.

International Commercial Banking
BES Group’s International Commercial Banking activity is developed in markets with cultural and economic
affinities with Portugal, and its expansion is essentially oriented to the South Atlantic Axis, namely to Africa
(Angola and the Maghreb countries) and Latin America (Brazil). The Group’s international presence is
mainly focused on specific areas where it holds competitive advantages, exploiting markets and/or business
areas with high growth potential, leveraging on the experience obtained, and in some areas the leading
position, in the domestic market. Faced with the increasing globalisation and openness of the financial
markets, BES Group’s international expansion also reflects the need to obtain the economies of scale and
operating efficiency gains afforded by a wider scope of operations. The Group’s strategy is to serve local
customers in target segments but also customers doing business on a trans-national scale.

Angola
In Angola BES Group operates directly in the local market through Banco Espírito Santo Angola, which
provides a global service to individual and corporate clients.

In 2009 Banco Espírito Santo Angola maintained its growth dynamics while steadily asserting its position in
Angola as one of the institutions with the best profitability and efficiency indicators in the local market. The
Bank’s performance continued to stem from a consistently implemented strategy focused on strength,
confidence and the excellence of the service provided to the client, which, together with its support of
cultural initiatives, has been acknowledged by prestigious international institutions. In fact, in the course of
the year BES Angola received (i) the “Planet Bank” award from the International Committee for the
Development of Planet Earth, coordinated by the UN via UNESCO (awarded to the banking institution
which has distinguished itself the most in supporting the dissemination of messages on protecting the
environment and sustainability), (ii) the “Best Foreign Exchange Provider Award 2009” and “Best Bank
Award 2009” attributed for the second consecutive year by the Global Finance magazine, (iii) the “Best Bank
in Angola 2009” award, attributed by the World Finance Magazine, and (iv) the “Best Capital Markets”
award, from EMEAfinance.

BES Angola’s commercial structure was reinforced in 2009, currently consisting of 34 branches, of which
21 located in Luanda, two corporate centres, a private banking centre and an investment banking office in
Luanda.

In Retail banking BES Angola’s activity is mainly directed to the affluent segment. Towards the end of the
year the Bank implemented the direct channels, namely BESAnet, an internet banking service permitting to
make inquiries and transactions online.

In corporate banking BES Angola focuses its activity on (i) establishing commercial partnerships of mutual
added value with the large and medium sized companies operating in Angola, namely by financing the
investment or cash needs of these companies and providing them technical and legal support; and (ii) backing
up foreign companies and entrepreneurs, namely from Portugal, Spain or Germany, who are expanding their
activity into Angola. At the same time, BES Group also plays an important role in supporting exports to
Angola, having set up a multidisciplinary team for the purpose.

The area of investment banking has been expanding, tracking business opportunities and participating in the
execution of project and corporate finance operations.

In asset management, BES Angola already has two firms, namely BESAACTIF, Sociedade Gestora de
Fundos de Investimento (the first fund management firm to operate in Angola) that manages a closed-end
real estate investment fund, and BESAACTIF, Sociedade Gestora de Fundos de Pensões, a pension fund
manager incorporated in 2009.




                                                      216
Spain
In Spain BES Group operates through a branch, developing activities in affluent banking, corporate banking
and private banking.

In affluent and private banking, the branch focuses its offer on-balance sheet products. In corporate banking,
the Group consolidated its integrated approach to companies in Iberia, launching an innovating service – the
BESnetwork, an Iberian Portal for Companies – which permits to execute transactions through the internet
in the same way, whether in Portugal, in Spain or between the two countries. The branch further developed
its international business capabilities, thus improving the services provided to clients operating not only in
Portugal but also in the other geographies where the Group is present. This also permitted to establish
relations with high potential clients, while maintaining a very prudent stance in risk allocation and
management.

United Kingdom
BES’s London Branch concentrates its activity in wholesale banking in the European market. As a
specialised credit unit, the branch acts with a high degree of selectivity, maintaining a conservative risk
management policy. Global trade finance is an area in expansion: several operations were concluded during
the year, greatly contributing to position BES as the most relevant bank in Portugal in terms of supporting
international transactions.

In terms of wholesale funding, there was a substantial increase in fund raising, particularly through the
issuance of Certificates of Deposit.

United States of America
Through Espírito Santo Bank, based in Miami, the Group develops international private banking activities in
the American continent, where its main customers are the communities of Portuguese residents, particularly
in Latin America. The bank’s activity in 2009 was characterised by the improvement of the quality and
selectivity of its loan portfolio, the containment of staff costs through a cutback policy, a decline in the cost
of funding, and the continued growth of results generated by the broker/dealer, based on a diversified and
strong offer of products and services and an effective interaction with the clients aimed at achieving their
financial targets in a particularly difficult environment.

BES’s New York branch concentrates its activity in wholesale banking, mainly in the US and Brazil. The
branch has had a crucial role in terms of obtaining funds from American institutional and corporate clients,
actively promoting the placement of the certificates of deposit programme (74 per cent. year-over-year
increase) and commercial paper programme. The markets’ adverse developments and continuous
deterioration of the US economy required increased prudence in business and an emphasis on risk
monitoring and management.

France
The Group’s activity in France is carried out by Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie. In 2009 this
continued to develop its traditional business lines concentrated in corporate banking, while launching into
new activities, namely portfolio management (for which it purchased an asset management firm, Marignan
Gestion), and private banking, setting up a structure for the purpose. In addition, the bank also provides
financial services to the community of Portuguese residents in France who are BES clients in Portugal.

China
BES Group is present in Macao through Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, whose activity is mainly focused
on supporting the international expansion of Portuguese companies into the Asian markets. In 2009 the bank
was particularly active in raising funds from local and regional clients, namely through the placement of a
Certificate of Deposit funding programme in Hong Kong, as well as in developing trade finance activities.




                                                      217
Cape Verde
The activity developed by the Group’s branch in Cape Verde is concentrated on corporate banking and
public/private sector investment in infrastructure (ports, roads, electricity and water) as well as on the
tourism sector, where it mainly targets Portuguese companies with business links in these islands.

Recent international activity
On 15th April, 2010, BES announced that the acquisition of Aman Bank, in Libya, was completed. BES
acquired a direct stake of 40 per cent. of the share capital of Aman Bank and will have management control
of Aman Bank, nominating the majority of the members of the Board of Directors, as well as the Chief
Executive Officer and main middle management.

On 26th July, 2010 BES informed about a Memorandum of Understanding signed through the subsidiary
company ‘BES Africa S.G.P.S., SA’, to acquire 25.1 per cent. of the share capital of Moza Banco, SA, a
Mozambican bank, founded in June 2008.

On 6th August, 2010, Banco Espírito Santo announced that ESAF- Espírito Santo Activos Financieros S.A.,
through Espírito Santo Gestión, SGIIC, SA reached an agreement, to fully acquire Banco Pastor’s fund
manager Gespastor SGIIC, S.A.. The purchase will include an exclusive commercial agreement with Banco
Pastor for the period of 7 years.

On 9th August, 2010 Banco Espírito Santo, Banco do Brasil and Bradesco signed a memorandum of
understanding envisaging the definition of a common strategy for Africa. As a result of this partnership,
Banco do Brasil and Bradesco will have a stake in BES Africa – BES Group holding for the participations
in African financial institutions. This holding will coordinate future investments of the three banking groups
in Africa, including acquisition of stakes in banks and/or establishment of direct operations of the
shareholders.

The partnership will leverage the synergies arising from the increasing presence of Portuguese and Brazilian
companies in Africa, and reflects a complementary Portugal/Brazil approach to the African market.

Investment Banking

Segment Overview
BES Group’s investment banking activity is developed by Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento (“BES
Investimento”), whose main objective is to provide services to medium-sized and large companies,
institutional clients, and in some specific segments, retail clients, in coordination with the Group’s private
banking area. BES Investimento offers a wide range of specialised products and services, including advisory
services in mergers and acquisitions, access to transactions in the capital markets (equities and debt),
brokerage and portfolio management services, structured finance, including project finance and acquisition
finance, and management of private equity funds.
                                                                                                                 A11.5.1.4
The bank’s good performance in 2009 was largely driven by the international growth strategy pursued over
the last years, focused on consolidating its presence in Spain, Brazil and the United Kingdom and selectively
expanding into new markets, namely Poland, Angola and the United States. More than 60 per cent. of BES
Investimento’s activity in 2009, as measured by banking income, net profit and number of employees, was
carried outside Portugal.

Strategic Focus
BES Investimento is set to assert a position as (i) a reference bank in Iberia, Brazil, the United Kingdom,
Angola and Poland; (ii) a relevant player in the distribution of products in the core geographies, with
privileged access to institutional investors in the world’s main financial centres (London, New York and
Hong Kong); and a relevant intervenient in project finance transactions in the transport infrastructure and
renewable energies sectors, with a special focus on Europe and the Americas.

The implementation of this strategy allowed BES Investimento to reinforce its position in the domestic
market, for which it once again received the prize for “Best Investment Bank in Portugal” awarded by the


                                                     218
World Finance magazine. The bank upheld its leading position in mergers and acquisitions (by number and
value of operations), being recognised by the Euromoney magazine as the “Best M&A Bank in Portugal”
(Euromoney Awards for Excellence) and “Best Bank for M&A Advisory in Portugal” (Euromoney Real
Estate Awards). In brokerage, BES Investimento also remained the market leader, significantly raising its
market share (to 15.9 per cent., from 11.7 per cent. in 2008), while continuing to lead reference transactions
in its other business areas.

Distribution Channels
In Spain, BES Investimento aims to position itself among the 10 main local investment banks. Benefiting
from an increasingly broad international presence and close coordination with the structures of Banco
Espírito Santo in Spain, it has been developing great efforts to further its reach in the corporate segment,
viewing the intensification of cross-border business and the development of capital markets, merger and
acquisitions and project finance activities. Although the Spanish economy was severely hit by the crisis in
2009, BES Investimento concluded four large and important merger and acquisition operations, once again
leading the Iberian M&A market by number of transactions. In Spain the bank reached third position in the
ranking of the Spanish brokerage market, having led and structured several major project finance operations,
including the €580 million financing of a 150 MW solar thermal park to be developed by Acciona, which
was awarded the “Renewables Deal of the Year” prize by the Project Finance International magazine.

In Brazil, BES Investimento is intent of asserting itself as a local player with international expertise,
operating in all areas of investment banking. In line with this strategy, the Bank has been consolidating its
presence in the market, reinforcing its existing business lines and investing in the development of new ones,
namely private equity, domestic private banking and asset management.

In 2009 BES Investimento led a number of project finance operations, namely two important ones that were
distinguished by the Project Finance International magazine: the financing of the construction by Odebrecht
Oil&Gas of two vessels for deep water oil exploration, respectively NORBE VIII and IX (“Americas Deal             A11.5.1.4
of the Year”), and the A/B loan financing of west stretch of the Rodoanel road project for the city of São
Paulo, Brazil (“Global Americas Transport Deal of the Year”). With two important events planned for the
coming years (the FIFA World Cup in 2014 and the Olympic Games in 2016), project finance activities are
expected to maintain strong growth.

Also worth stressing in 2009 was the announcement of a partnership entered with Banco Bradesco to create
a new private equity fund manager in Brazil to be held in equal parts by the two banks. The new company
will start by raising a BRL 500 million fund to invest in buy-outs and expansion capital provided to medium-
sized companies.

BES Investimento intends to expand its presence in the United Kingdom, which is currently concentrated in
project finance and advisory serves to cross-border merger and acquisitions, creating for the purpose a
platform for distribution of its products and services.

In the United States, the bank aims to develop project finance and other structured finance activities, and
create a platform for distribution of capital market products, capitalising on (i) its business origination
capacity in Brazil, due to its local presence in the country, (ii) the active strong capital market activities
developed in the Iberian Peninsula; and (iii) the existing relationships with reference clients in the project
finance area, in particular in the infrastructure and renewable energies sectors. In addition, BES Investimento
also intends to expand its business origination basis into the Spanish speaking countries in Latin America.

The bank led 8 project finance operations, taking advantage of buoyant conditions in the US renewable
energies market and in the Canadian social infrastructures sector. In addition, it also initiated merger and
acquisition and capital market activities.

The bank’s entry in Poland aimed to exploit the strong growth potential that exists not only in that country
but also in Central Europe in general. Because it escaped recession, Poland is less debilitated than most
countries in Europe and is therefore more likely to see the emergence of business opportunities for
investment banking. Moreover, the country has under way a programme of privatisations, involving a
number of large operations, and is also developing important infrastructure projects. In addition to


                                                     219
developing its current activities – mergers and acquisitions, brokerage and project finance, BES Investimento
is also set on creating new business areas in the Polish market, and is currently starting fixed income
activities, which will be backed by a commercial origination team.

In project finance, the Bank led an important operation in the Polish market, which consisted in structuring
and arranging the €400 million financing for the A2 Motorway project.

Asset Management
Segment Overview
Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros (“ESAF”) is BES’ subsidiary for the asset management business,
operating in Portugal, Spain, Brazil, Angola, Luxembourg and the United Kingdom. At the end of 2009
ESAF had total assets under management (off-balance sheet funds and CDO contracts) in excess of €20.8
billion, corresponding to a YoY increase of 4.6 per cent.

Mutual Funds
Total assets under management reached €5.531 million at the end of 2009. The year was marked by a focus
on permanent adjustment of the offer to market needs, leading to the launch of four new special investment
funds – Espírito Santo Rendimento Fixo I, Espírito Santo Rendimento Fixo II, Espírito Santo Estratégia
Acções and Benfica Stars Fund.

In Luxembourg, BES Group has five funds under management targeting clients with a wide range of risk
profiles. At the end of 2009 the aggregate volume in these funds was €702 million: (i) The ES Fund, which
has 11 compartments (shares and bonds), reached €354 million, due to the launch of three new
compartments, respectively Espírito Santo Brazil, Espírito Santo Africa and Espírito Santo Trading Fund; (ii)
The Global Active Allocation Fund, targeting individual clients and institutions, with volume of €71 million;
(iii) The Caravela Fund SICAV, made up of five compartments; (iv) The SICAV European Responsible
Consumer Fund, which is sold in Portugal, Spain, Italy and Luxembourg and whose investments take into
account ethical, environmental and social concerns; (v) and finally, the Espírito Santo Rockefeller Global –
Energy Fund, crated under a joint venture between the Espírito Santo Group and the North-American
Rockefeller fund manager to manage and sell a special investment fund exclusively dedicated to the energy
sector.

Real Estate Funds
On 31st December, 2009 ESAF had an overall volume under management in real estate funds of €1.263
million, which represents an increase of 11 per cent. when compared to the previous year. Assets under
management were represented by 27 mutual funds, of which two - Gespatrimónio Rendimento and Espírito
Santo Logística – are open-end and have a total volume of €912 million. A new fund was launched during
the year, the Fundo de Investimento Imobiliário Espírito Santo Arrendamento, a closed-end real estate fund
for residential rental.

Pension Funds
In Pension Funds, assets under management totalled €2.722 million, representing a year on year increase of
4.4 per cent. A new pension fund was launched in 2009, the Fundo de Pensões Aberto Espírito Santo
Multireforma Capital Garantido, which targets investors looking for a long term placement for their savings
as a complement to their retirement pensions, with a tax benefit.

Portfolio Management
The Portfolio Management service, designed for clients in the Private Banking and BES 360 segments, aims
to obtain sustainable returns over the long run.

Assets under management (in national and foreign currency) totalled €2.635 million at the end of the year,
corresponding to a year on year increase of 34 per cent. driven by the rebound registered in the main markets.




                                                     220
Strategic Focus
The four main strategic focuses of ESAF are:
•       to increase the contribution of BES’ international activities to assets under management and the
        results of operations of ESAF;
•       to increase market share and optimise the asset mix of funds distributed;
•       to grow the size of assets under management, through the creation of new products targeted at
        institutional investors, based on ESAF’s cumulative market and product knowledge; and
•       to improve client services, notably in information delivery and remote transaction execution.

Distribution Channels
ESAF currently has assets under management in Portugal, Spain, Luxembourg, the United Kingdom and
Angola. In each jurisdiction in which ESAF manages assets, ESAF works closely with subsidiaries, branches
and other financial entities within the BES Group that operate in those respective jurisdictions in order to
leverage its existing branch and subsidiary network in order to increase assets under management. The
volume of assets under management is primarily concentrated in three specific jurisdictions: Portugal (84 per
cent. of total assets under management), Spain (nine per cent.) and Luxembourg (four per cent.).

4.      BES Group Structure
As well as being an operating entity in its own right, BES is the holding company of the BES Group, and                                   A11.6.1

thus has investments in subsidiary and associated companies.

The following tables provide information on the organisational structure of the BES Group as of
31st December, 2009:
                                                                                                        % economic      Consolidation
                                           Established   Acquired Headquartered    Activity             interest              method
BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, SA (BES)             1937          –        Portugal         Commercial banking
Banco Espírito Santo de
  Investimento, SA (BESI)                  1993          1997     Portugal         Investment bank      100.00%      Full consolidation
Avistar, SGPS, SA                          2009          2009     Portugal         Holding company      100.00%      Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Servicios, SA               1996          1997     Spain            Insurance            99.98%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Activos Financieros, SA     1988          2000     Spain            Asset management     92.50%       Full consolidation
Banco Espírito Santo dos Açores,
  SA (BAC)                                 2002          2002     Portugal         Commercial banking   57.53%       Full consolidation
BEST – Banco Electrónico de Serviço
  Total, SA (BEST)                         2001          2001     Portugal         Internet banking     66.00%       Full consolidation
BES África, SGPS, SA                       2009          2009     Portugal         Holding company      100.00%      Full consolidation
Banco Espírito Santo Angola, SARL
  (BESA)                                   2001          2001     Angola           Commercial banking   51.94%       Full consolidation
BESAACTIF – Sociedade Gestora de           2008          2008     Angola           Asset management –
  Fundos de Investimento, SA                                                       Investment funds     61.95%       Full consolidation
BESAACTIF Pensões – Sociedade              2009          2009     Angola           Asset management –
  Gestora de Fundos de Pensões, SA                                                 Pension funds        61.95%       Full consolidation
Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, SA
  (BESOR)                                  1996          1996     Macao            Commercial banking   99.75%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Bank, Inc. (ESBANK)         1963          2000     USA              Commercial banking   98.45%       Full consolidation
BES Beteiligungs, GmbH (BES GMBH)          2006          2006     Germany          Holding company      100.00%      Full consolidation
BIC International Bank Ltd. (BIBL)         2000          2000     Cayman Islands   Commercial banking   100.00%      Full consolidation
Parsuni – Sociedade Unipessoal, SGPS       2004          2005     Portugal         Holding company      100.00%      Full consolidation
Praça do Marquês – Serviços Auxiliares,
  SA (PÇMARQUÊS)                           1990          2007     Portugal         Real estate          100.00%      Full consolidation
Espírito Santo, plc. (ESPLC)               1999          1999     Ireland          Non-bank finance
                                                                                   company              99.99%       Full consolidation
ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos
  Financeiros, S.G.P.S., SA (ESAF)         1992          1992     Portugal         Holding company      85.00%       Full consolidation
ES Tech Ventures, S.G.P.S., SA (ESTV)      2000          2000     Portugal         Holding company      100.00%      Full consolidation
Banco Espirito Santo North American
  Capital Limited Liability Co. (BESNAC)   1990          1990     USA              Financing vehicle    100.00%      Full consolidation
BES Finance, Ltd. (BESFINANCE)             1997          1997     Cayman Islands   Financing vehicle    100.00%      Full consolidation
ES, Recuperação de Crédito, ACE (ESREC)    1998          1998     Portugal         Credit recovery      100.00%      Full consolidation
ES Concessões, SGPS, SA
  (ES CONCESSÕES)                          2002          2003     Portugal         Holding company      40.96%(a)    Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Informática, ACE (ESINF)    2006          2006     Portugal         Services provider    84.90%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Prestação de Serviços,
  ACE 2 (ES ACE2)                          2006          2006     Portugal         Services provider    100.00%      Full consolidation




                                                                  221
                                                                                                            % economic      Consolidation
                                             Established   Acquired Headquartered   Activity                interest              method
ESGEST – Esp. Santo Gestão Instalações,
  Aprov. e Com., SA (ESGEST)                 1995          1995     Portugal        Services provider       100.00%      Full consolidation
Cêntimo, SGPS, SA (CÊNTIMO)                  1988          1995     Portugal        Holding company         100.00%      Full consolidation
Espírito Santo e Comercial de Lisboa, Inc.
  (ESCLINC)                                  1982          1997     USA             Representation office   100.00%      Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Representações, Ltda.
  (ESREP)                                    1996          1996     Brazil          Representation office   99.99%       Full consolidation
Quinta dos Cónegos – Sociedade
  Imobiliária, SA (CÓNEGOS)                  1991          2000     Portugal        Real estate             81.00%       Full consolidation
Fundo de Capital de Risco –
  ES Ventures II                             2006          2006     Portugal        Venture capital fund    58.79%       Full consolidation
Fundo de Capital de Risco –
  ES Ventures III                            2009          2009     Portugal        Venture capital fund    64.89%       Full consolidation
Fundo de Capital de Risco –
  BES PME Capital Growth                     2009          2009     Portugal        Venture capital fund    100.00%      Full consolidation
Fundo FCR PME / BES                          1997          1997     Portugal        Venture capital fund    57.09%       Full consolidation
Europ Assistance – Comp. Portuguesa
  Seguros Assistência, SA (EURASS)           1993          1993     Portugal        Insurance               23.00%          Equity method
BES-Vida, Companhia de Seguros,
  SA (BES VIDA)                              1993          2006     Portugal        Insurance               50.00%          Equity method
BES, Companhia de Seguros, SA
  (BES SEGUROS)                              1996          1996     Portugal        Insurance               25.00%          Equity method
Fiduprivate – Soc. de Serviços, Consult.,
  Adm. de Empresas, SA (FIDUPRIVATE)         1994          1994     Portugal        Consulting              24.76%          Equity method
Esumédica – Prestação de Cuidados
  Médicos, SA (ESUMÉDICA)                    1994          1994     Portugal        Health care             24.90%          Equity method
Société Civile Immobilière du
  45 Avenue Georges Mandel (SCI GM)          1995          1995     France          Real estate             22.50%          Equity method
ESEGUR – Espírito Santo Segurança,
  SA (ESEGUR)                                1994          2004     Portugal        Security                44.00%          Equity method
Locarent – Companhia Portuguesa de
  Aluguer de Viaturas, SA (LOCARENT)         1991          2003     Portugal        Renting                 50.00%          Equity method
Banco Delle Tre Venezie, Spa                 2006          2007     Italy           Commercial banking      20.00%          Equity method
OBLOG Consulting, SA                         1993          1993     Portugal        Software development    66.63%          Equity method




                                                                    222
b) Sub-Groups
                                                                                                            % economic      Consolidation
                                           Established   Acquired Headquartered    Activity                 interest              method
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento,
 SA (BESI)                                 1993          1997     Portugal         Investment bank          100.00%      Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Capital – Sociedade de
 Capital de Risco, SA (ESCAPITAL)          1988          1996     Portugal         Venture capital          100.00%      Full consolidation
SES Iberia                                 2004          2004     Spain            Asset management         50.00%       Full consolidation
HLC – Centrais de Cogeração, S.A.          1999          1999     Portugal         Services provider        24.50%(b)       Equity method
Coporgest                                  2002          2005     Portugal         Holding company          25.00%          Equity method
Neumáticos Andrés Investment, S.A.         1987          2006     Spain            Services provider        17.68%(b)       Equity method
Synergy Industry and Technology, S.A.      2006          2007     Spain            Holding company          25.25%          Equity method
Salgar Investments, S.L.                   2007          2007     Spain            Services provider        23.58%          Equity method
Só Peso Restauração e Hotelaria,S.A.       2006          2007     Portugal         Restaurants              9.77%(b)        Equity method
ESSI Comunicações SGPS, SA                 1998          1998     Portugal         Holding company          100.00%      Full consolidation
ESSI SGPS, SA                              1997          1997     Portugal         Holding company          100.00%      Full consolidation
Concordia – Espírito Santo Investment      2005          2005     Poland           Services provider        100.00%      Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Investments PLC             1996          1996     Ireland          Non-bank finance
                                                                                   company                  100.00%      Full consolidation
ESSI Investimentos SGPS, SA                1998          1998     Portugal         Holding company          100.00%      Full consolidation
ESSI FIN, SGPS, SA                         2008          2008     Portugal         Holding company          60.00%       Full consolidation
Fin Solutia – Consultoria de Gestão
  de Créditos, SA                          2007          2007     Portugal         Credit recovery          29.70%          Equity method
Polish Hotel Company, SP                   2007          2008     Poland           Services provider        33.00%          Equity method
Polish Hotel Capital SP                    2007          2008     Poland           Services provider        33.00%          Equity method
Polish Hotel Management Company, SP        2008          2008     Poland           Services provider        25.00%          Equity method
Espirito Santo Investimentos, Ltda         1996          1996     Brazil           Holding company          100.00%      Full consolidation
BES Investimento do Brasil, SA             2000          2000     Brazil           Investment bank          80.00%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Capital Brasil, SA          2005          2005     Brazil           Brokerage house          90.00%       Full consolidation
BES Securities do Brasil, SA               2000          2000     Brazil           Asset management         80.00%       Full consolidation
Gespar S/C, Ltda.                          2001          2001     Brazil           Holding company          80.00%       Full consolidation
BES Activos Financeiros, Ltda              2004          2004     Brazil           Asset management         82.50%       Full consolidation
FI Multimercado Treasury                   2005          2005     Brazil           Investment fund          80.00%       Full consolidation
BES REFRAN Investimentos                   2009          2009     Brazil           Services provider        56.00%       Full consolidation
BES REFRAN Consultoria                     2009          2009     Brazil           Services provider        56.00%       Full consolidation
BRB Internacional, S.A.                    2001          2001     Spain            Entertainment            24.93%          Equity method
Prosport – Com. Desportivas, S.A.          2001          2001     Spain            Sporting goods trading   25.00%          Equity method
Apolo Films, SL                            2001          2001     Spain            Entertainment            25.15%          Equity method
Cominvest- SGII, S.A.                      1993          1993     Portugal         Real estate              49.00%(a)    Full consolidation
Kuthaya                                    1999          1999     Portugal         Management and
                                                                                   international trading    100.00%      Full consolidation
Fundo Espírito Santo IBERIA I               2004         2004     Portugal         Venture capital fund     38.69%          Equity method
Fundo BES Multimercado                      2009         2009     Brazil           Investment fund          52.93%       Full consolidation
Fundo BES Absolute Return                   2009         2009     Brazil           Investment fund          52.15%       Full consolidation
BES Beteiligungs, GmbH (BES GMBH)           2006         2006     Germany          Holding company          100.00%      Full consolidation
Bank Espírito Santo International, Ltd.
  (BESIL)                                   1983         2002     Cayman Islands   Commercial banking       100.00%      Full consolidation
ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos
  Financeiros, S.G.P.S., SA (ESAF)          1992         1992     Portugal       Holding company            85.00%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento       1987         1987     Portugal       Asset management –
  Mobiliário, SA                                                                 investment funds           85.00%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo International Management, SA 1995         1995     Luxembourg     Asset management –
                                                                                 investment funds           84.83%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento      1992          1992     Portugal       Asset management –
  Imobiliário, SA                                                                investment funds           85.00%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Fundo de Pensões, SA        1989          1989     Portugal       Asset management –
                                                                                 pension funds              85.00%       Full consolidation
Capital Mais – Assessoria Financeira, SA   1998          1998     Portugal       Asset management –
                                                                                 investment funds           85.00%       Full consolidation
Espirito Santo International Asset         1998          1998     British Virgin Asset management –
  Management, Ltd.                                                Islands        investment funds           41.65%          Equity method
Espírito Santo Gestão de Patrimónios, SA   1987          1987     Portugal       Asset management –
                                                                                 investment funds           85.00%       Full consolidation
ESAF – Espírito Santo Participações        1996          1996     Portugal       Asset management –
  Internacionais, SGPS, SA                                                       investment funds           85.00%       Full consolidation
ESAF – International Distributors          2001          2001     British Virgin Asset management –
  Associates, Ltd                                                 Islands        investment funds           85.00%       Full consolidation
ESAF – Alternative Asset Management, Ltd   2007          2007     United Kingdom Asset management –
                                                                                 investment funds           85.00%       Full consolidation




                                                                  223
                                                                                                              % economic      Consolidation
                                              Established   Acquired Headquartered   Activity                 interest              method
ES Tech Ventures, S.G.P.S., SA (ESTV)         2000          2000     Portugal        Holding company          100.00%      Full consolidation
ES Ventures – Sociedade de Capital de
  Risco, SA                                   2005          2005     Portugal        Venture capital          100.00%      Full consolidation
SGPICE Soc. de Serviços de Gestão             2001          2001     Portugal        Management of
                                                                                     internet portals         33.33%          Equity method
Jampur – Trading Internacional, Lda.
  (JAMPUR)                                    1999          2001     Portugal        Holding company          100.00%      Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Contact Center, Gestão         2000          2000     Portugal        Call centers
  de Call Centers, SA (ESCC)                                                         management company       41.67%          Equity method
Banque Espirito Santo et de la Vénétie,
  SA (ES Vénétie)                             1927          1993     France          Commercial banking       42.69%          Equity method
Fundo de Capital de Risco – ES Ventures II    2006          2006     Portugal        Venture capital fund     58.79%       Full consolidation
Atlantic Ventures Corporation                 2006          2006     USA             Holding company          58.79%       Full consolidation
Sousacamp, SGPS, SA                           2007          2007     Portugal        Holding company          22.99%          Equity method
Global Active – SGPS, SA                      2006          2006     Portugal        Holding company          26.26%(b)       Equity method
Outsystems, SA                                2007          2007     Portugal        IT Services              17.22%          Equity method
Coreworks – Proj. Circuito Sist. Elect., SA   2006          2006     Portugal        IT Services              23.53%          Equity method
Multiwave Photonics, SA                       2003          2008     Portugal        IT Services              12.20%(b)       Equity method
Bio-Genesis                                   2007          2007     Brazil          Holding company          17.60%(b)       Equity method
YDreams – Informática, SA                     2000          2009     Portugal        IT Services              15.33%(b)       Equity method
Aquaspy Group Pty Limited                     1997          2009     Australia       Services provider        15.43%(b)       Equity method
Fundo de Capital de Risco – ES Ventures III   2009          2009     Portugal        Venture capital fund     64.89%       Full consolidation
Nutrigreen, SA                                2007          2009     Portugal        Services provider        12.98%(b)      Eq. Patrimonial
Advance Ciclone Systems, SA                   2008          2009     Portugal        Treatment and
                                                                                     elimination of residues 20.76%          Eq. Patrimonial
Fundo FCR PME / BES                           1997          1997     Portugal        Venture capital fund     57.09%(a)    Full consolidation
MMCI – Multimédia, SA                         2008          2008     Portugal        Holding company          27.97%       Full consolidation
Mobile World – Comunicações. SA               2009          2009     Portugal        Telecommunications       27.97%          Equity method
Cortinovador, SA                              2009          2009     Portugal        Manufacture of furniture 28.26%          Equity method
Soprattutto Café, S.A                         2006          2006     Portugal        Distribution company     25,59%          Equity method
Enkrott SA                                    2006          2006     Portugal        Water management
                                                                                     and treatment            17,13%(b)       Equity method
Nova Figfort – Têxteis, Lda                   1995          2009     Portugal        Manufacture clothing     19.01%(b)       Equity method
Rodi – Sinks & Ideas, SA                      2006          2006     Portugal        Industry                 25.29%          Equity method
Espírito Santo Activos Financieros, SA        1988          2000     Spain           Asset management         92.50%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Gestion, SA, SGIIC             2001          2001     Spain           Asset management         92.50%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Pensiones, S.G.F.P., SA        2001          2001     Spain           Asset management
                                                                                     – pension funds          92.50%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Bank, Inc. (ESBANK)            1963          2000     USA             Commercial banking       98.45%       Full consolidation
ES Financial Services, Inc.                   2000          2000     USA             Brokerage                84.15%       Full consolidation
Tagide Properties, Inc.                       1991          1991     USA             Real estate              98.45%       Full consolidation
Espírito Santo Representaciones               2003          2003     Uruguay         Representation office    98.45%       Full consolidation
ES Concessões, SGPS, SA
  (ES CONCESSÕES)                             2002          2003     Portugal        Holding company          40.96%(a)    Full consolidation
Concesionaria Autopista Perote-Xalapa, CV     2008          2008     Mexico          Motorway concession      8.19%(b)        Equity method
Empark – Aparcamientos y Servicios, SA        1968          2009     Spain           Management of
                                                                                     parking lots             11.77%(b)       Equity method
Ascendi – Concessões de Transportes,
  SGPS, SA                                    2007          2008     Portugal        Motorway concession      16.38%(b)       Equity method
Lusoscut – Auto-Estradas da Costa de
  Prata, S.A.                                 2000          2000     Portugal        Motorway concession      9.17%(b)        Equity method
Lusoscut – Auto-Estradas das Beiras
  Litoral e Alta, S.A.                        2001          2001     Portugal        Motorway concession      9.17%(b)        Equity method
Lusoscut – Auto-Estradas do Grande
  Porto, S.A.                                 2002          2002     Portugal        Motorway concession      9.17%(b)        Equity method




                                                                     224
5.    Management and Statutory Auditor
Pursuant to Portuguese law, BES has a management structure consisting of a Board of Directors (the
“Board”), including an Audit Committee, which is elected by the General Meeting. According to BES’s
Articles of Association the Board is composed of a minimum of 11 to a maximum of 31 members
(“Directors”), who may or may not be shareholders. The current Board is made up of 27 Directors, including
3 members of the Audit Committee. The term of office of a Director is four years and re-election is permitted
without any cap or age limits. The General Meeting appoints the Chairman of the Board. In the Chairman’s
absence or in case an impediment arises, he is replaced by the Chairman of the Executive Committee. The
General Meeting may also elect one or more Vice-Chairman of the Board. In the case of definitive absence
or impediment of any member of the Board, a substitute member will be co-opted, and this co-optation
ratified in the next General Meeting. The mandate of the Member so elected will expire at the end of the
office period for which the replaced Member had been elected. The Board meets at least quarterly and
whenever convened by the Chairman, by two board members or by the Audit Committee.

The day-to-day management of the Company is delegated by the Board to an Executive Committee (the
“Executive Committee”). The Board designates the Chairman and the members of the Executive Committee.
At present this Committee consists of 11 Directors. It meets regularly once a week, also ensuring day-to-day
monitoring that on occasion requires extraordinary meetings.

The Audit Committee is composed of a minimum of three and a maximum of five members of the Board of
Directors, one of whom is appointed the Chairman. The members of the Audit Committee are elected by the
General Meeting, and appointed simultaneously with the appointment of the other members of the Board of
Directors, for periods of four years, their re-election being permitted. The members of the Audit Committee
may be dismissed by the General Meeting, providing there are fair grounds for dismissal. The Audit
Committee’s functions are essentially of a supervisory nature. The Committee has full powers to conduct,
contract or authorise investigations within the sphere of its responsibilities.

The Audit Committee is the supervisory body of BES, responsible for supervision of the Bank management
in general, for verification of the effectiveness of the risk management system, the internal control system
and of the internal audit system, as well as represent BES, for all purposes, to the external auditor, which is
annually evaluated by this Committee. The annual report about the activities of the Audit Committee
includes the description of the supervisory activity undertaken and is disclosed on the BES website, at
www.bes.pt.

The Audit Committee is composed of three non executive directors qualified as independent: José Manuel            A4.11.1

Ruivo da Pena, Luís António Burnay Pinto de Carvalho Daun e Lorena and João de Faria Rodrigues.

BES complies with its country’s of incorporation corporate governance regime(s).                                  A4.11.2


The following table sets out the members of the Board for the 2008-2011 four-year mandate, elected on the         A11.9.1

General Meeting of 31st March, 2008, such members being capable of being contacted through the BES’s              A11.9.2

head office and contact details.

BES is not aware of any potential conflicts of interest between the duties to BES of the members of the board
and their private interests and/or other duties.




                                                     225
                                                                    Executive
Board Member                       Date of birth    Nationality     Committee     Independent    Reason for not independent
Alberto de Oliveira Pinto          26-06-1932       Portuguese      No            Yes
Ricardo Salgado                    25-06-1944       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Jean-Frédéric de Leusse(1)         29-10-1957       French          No            No             Board Member or contract with
                                                                                                 shareholder Crédit Agricole, S.A.
José Manuel Espírito Santo         02-05-1945       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
António Souto                      17-04-1950       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Jorge Martins                      17-07-1957       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Aníbal Oliveira                    24-09-1935       Portuguese      No            No             Board Member of Espírito Santo
                                                                                                 Financial (Portugal) – SGPS, S.A.
Manuel Fernando Espírito Santo     20-07-1958       Portuguese      No            No             Board Member of Espírito Santo
                                                                                                 Financial (Portugal) – SGPS, S.A.
José Maria Ricciardi               27-10-1954       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Jean-Luc Guinoiseau                20-12-1954       French          Yes           No             Executive
Rui Silveira                       11-12-1954       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Joaquim Goes                       09-09-1966       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Pedro Homem                        19-07-1947       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Luís Daun e Lorena                 11-10-1944       Portuguese      No            Yes
Ricardo Espírito Santo Silva       04-11-1958       Portuguese      No            No             Board Member of Espírito Santo
                                                                                                 Financial (Portugal) – SGPS, S.A.
José Pena                          05-11-1940       Portuguese      No            Yes
Amílcar Morais Pires               30-05-1961       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Bernard Delas(2)                   01-08-1948       French          No            No             Board Member or contract with
                                                                                                 shareholder Crédit Agricole, S.A.
Nuno Godinho de Matos              31-10-1949       Portuguese      No            Yes
João Freixa                        24-06-1956       Portuguese      Yes           No             Executive
Bernard Octave Mary(3)             17-11-1947       French          No            No             Board Member or contract with
                                                                                                 shareholder Crédit Agricole, S.A.
Michel Goutorbe                    16-11-1956       French          No            No             Board Member or contract with
                                                                                                 shareholder Crédit Agricole, S.A.
Pedro Amaral                       27-06-1968       Portuguese      No            No             Contract with BES
Isabel de Sousa Coutinho           12-12-1946       Portuguese      No            Yes
João de Faria Rodrigues            31-10-1955       Portuguese      No            Yes
José Epifânio da Franca            02-01-1955       Portuguese      No            Yes
Luiz Carlos Cappi(5)               06-10-1951       Brazilian       No            No             Board Member or contract with
                                                                                                 shareholder Banco Bradesco, S.A.

(1) Renounced his position as a non executive board member and was substituted by Bruno de Laage de Meux, co-opted by the Board
    of Directors on 10th May, 2010.
(2) Bernard Delas renounced his position as a non executive member of the Board of Directors on 5th February, 2010. On
    10th May, 2010 BES Board of Directors co-opted Jean Yves Hocher to fill the vacant position of non executive board member.
(3) Co-opted by the Board of Directors on 31st October, 2008 to replace Gilles Roland Maurice Jacquin de Margerie, who renounced
    his position on 7th November, 2008(4). On 16th July, 2010, Bernard Octave Mary resigned from his position as a non executive
    member of the board of directors. On 30th July, 2010 BES Board of Diorectors co-opted Marc Olivier Tristan Oppenheim to fill
    the vacant position of non executive board member.
(4) Gilles Roland Maurice Jacquin de Margerie had been co-opted by the Board of Directors on 1st July, 2008, to replace Jean-Yves
    Hocher, who had renounced his position.
(5) Luiz Carlos Trabuco Cappi was elected by the General Meeting of 16th July, 2009. On 10th May, 2010 Luiz Carlos Cappi
    renounced his position as a non executive board member. BES Board of Directors co-opted Antonio Bornia to fill the vacant
    position of non executive board member.




                                                              226
The following is a List of Corporate Positions of the Members of the Board of Directors:

Alberto Alves de Oliveira Pinto
Holds no positions in other companies.

Ricardo Espírito Santo Silva Salgado
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES        B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                  BES Group
Board of Directors                                     Board of Directors
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A.             Banco Bradesco, S.A. (Member)
  (Chairman)                                           Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie (Member)
BES África, SGPS, S.A. (Chairman)                      Banque Privée Espírito Santo, S.A. (Member)
BES Finance, Ltd. (Member)                             Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
BEST – Banco Electrónico de Serviço Total, S.A.          Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)
  (Chairman)                                           Casa dos Pórticos – Sociedade de Administração de
ES Tech Ventures - Sociedade Gestora de                  Bens, S.A. (Chairman)
  Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)               ES Bankers (Dubai) Limited (Chairman)
ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros -            Espírito Santo Control, S.A. (Member)
  Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.     E.S. Holding Administração e Participações, S.A.
  (Chairman)                                             (Vice-Chairman)
Espírito Santo Bank (Member)                           Espírito Santo Financial (Portugal) - Sociedade
Espírito Santo – Empresa de Prestação de Serviços        Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
  2, ACE (Chairman)                                      (Chairman)
Espírito Santo Ventures, Sociedade de Capital de       Espírito Santo Financial Group, S.A. (Chairman)
  Risco, S.A. (Chairman)                               Espírito Santo International, S.A. (Member)
                                                       Espírito Santo Resources Limited (Member)
                                                       Espírito Santo Saúde - Sociedade Gestora de
                                                         Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                       Espírito Santo Services, S.A (Member)
                                                       Partran - Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                                         Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                       Sociedade de Administração de Bens Pedra da Nau,
                                                         S.A. (Chairman)
                                                       NYSE Euronext (member of the Board of Directors
                                                         and of the Human Resources & Compensation
                                                         Committee)




                                                     227
Jean-Fréderic Marie Jacques de Leusse *
                                                              Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                              Group
                                                              Board of Directors
                                                              AMUNDI (Member) - (Notes: (i) created on
                                                                31.12.2009, former Crédit Agricole Asset
                                                                Management; (ii) terminated functions on
                                                                31.12.2009)
                                                              AMUNDI Group (Member) - (Note: created on
                                                                31.12.2009, former Crédit Agricole Asset
                                                                Management Group)
                                                              BESPAR – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                                                Sociais, S.A. (Member)
                                                              BGPI (Member)
                                                              Bank Saudi Fransi (Saudi Arabia) (Member)
                                                              CACEIS (Member)
                                                              Crédit Agricole Egypt S.A.E. (Vice-Chairman)
                                                              Crédit Agricole Luxembourg (Chairman)
                                                              Crédit Agricole, S.A. (Executive Vice-President in
                                                                charge of Métiers Spécialisés, member of the
                                                                Executive Committee, member of the General
                                                                Management Board)
                                                              De Dietrich (France) (Member of the Supervisory
                                                                Board)
                                                              Emporiki Bank (Greece) (Chairman)
                                                              FGA Capital S.p.A. (Chairman)
                                                              FINAREF (Chairman)
                                                              Sofinco (Chairman)
                                                              Union de Banques Arabes et Françaises (Vice -
                                                                Chairman)
                                                              Calyon (Member of the Board of Directors and
                                                                Executive Committee) (Note: on 06.02.2010 the
                                                                company changed its name to Crédit Agricole
                                                                Corporate and Investment Bank)

*   Renounced his position as a non executive board member and was substituted by Bruno de Laage de Meux, co-opted by BES
    Board of Directors on 10th May, 2010.




                                                          228
José Manuel Pinheiro Espírito Santo Silva
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES        B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                  BES Group
Board of Directors                                     Board of Directors
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A.             Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
  (Member)                                               Sociais, S.A. (Member)
BES África, SGPS, S.A. (Member)                        Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie, S.A.
ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros,               (Member)
  Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.     Banque Privée Espírito Santo, S.A. (Chairman)
  (Member)                                             Espírito Santo Control, S.A. (Member)
Espírito Santo Bank (Member)                           Espírito Santo Financial (Portugal) - Sociedade
                                                         Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Vice-
                                                         Chairman)
                                                       Espírito Santo Financial Group, S.A. (Vice-
                                                         Chairman)
                                                       Espírito Santo International, S.A. (Member)
                                                       Espírito Santo Resources Limited (Member)
                                                       Espírito Santo Services, S.A (Member)
                                                       Europ Assistance – Companhia Portuguesa Seguros
                                                         Assistência, S.A. (Member)
                                                       Fiduprivate – Sociedade de Serviços, Consultoria,
                                                         Administração de Empresas, S.A. (Chairman)


António José Baptista do Souto
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES        B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                  BES Group
Board of Directors                                     Board of Directors
BES África, SGPS, S.A. (Member)                        Angra Moura – Sociedade de Administração de
                                                       Bens, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                       Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade, SA
                                                       (Member)
                                                       SIBS – Sociedade Interbancária de Serviços, S.A.
                                                       (Member)

Jorge Alberto Carvalho Martins
                                                       Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                       Group
                                                       Fiscal Board
                                                       Agência de Desenvolvimento Regional de Entre-o-
                                                        Douro e Tâmega (Chairman)
                                                       Board of Directors
                                                       Locarent – Companhia Portuguesa de Aluguer de
                                                        Viaturas, S.A. (Member)
                                                       Higher Council
                                                       Primus, Promoção e Desenvolvimento Regional,
                                                         S.A. (Member)




                                                     229
Aníbal da Costa Reis de Oliveira
                                     Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                     Group
                                     Board of Directors
                                     ACRO, Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                      Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)
                                     Diliva – Sociedade de Investimentos Imobiliários,
                                      S.A. (Chairman)
                                     Espírito Santo Financial Group, S.A. (Member)
                                     Espírito Santo Financial (Portugal), Sociedade
                                       Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)
                                     Espírito Santo International, S.A. (Member)
                                     Olinveste, Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                      Sociais, Lda. (Member)
                                     Saramagos – Sociedade Produtora de Energia, S.A.
                                       (Chairman)
                                     Olinerg – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                      Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)




                                   230
Manuel Fernando Moniz Galvão Espírito Santo Silva
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                        BES Group
Board of Directors                                Board of Directors
Espírito Santo Bank (Member)                      Higher Council of Espírito Santo Group (Member)
                                                  Academia de Música de Santa Cecília (Non
                                                   Executive Chairman)
                                                  Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                                   Sociais, S.A. (Member)
                                                  Rio Forte Investments, SA (Chairman)
                                                  Espírito Santo Control, S.A. (Member)
                                                  Espírito Santo Financial Group, S.A. (Member)
                                                  Espírito Santo Industrial S.A. (Chairman)
                                                  Espírito Santo International, S.A. (Member)
                                                  Espírito Santo Resources, Limited (Chairman of
                                                    the Executive Committee)
                                                  Espírito Santo Resources (Portugal), S.A.
                                                    (Member)
                                                  Espírito Santo Services, S.A (Member)
                                                  Espírito Santo Tourism (Europe), S.A. (Chairman)
                                                  Euroamerican Finance Corporation, Inc.
                                                   (Chairman)
                                                  Herdade da Comporta – Actividades Agro
                                                   Silvícolas e Turísticas, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                  Santogal – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                                    Sociais, S.A. (Member)
                                                  Sociedade de Investimentos Imobiliários Sodim,
                                                    S.A. (Member)
                                                  Sapec, S.A. (Member)
                                                  Board of General Meeting
                                                  Espart – Espírito Santo Participações Financeiras,
                                                    Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
                                                    (Chairman)
                                                  Sociedade Imobiliária e Turística da Quinta do
                                                    Peru, S.A. (Chairman)




                                               231
José Maria Espírito Santo Silva Ricciardi
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES       B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                 BES Group
Board of Directors                                    Board of Directors
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Vice-     Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (Member)
 Chairman and Chairman of the Executive
                                                      General and Supervisory Board
 Committee)
                                                      EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A (Member)
BES África, SGPS, S.A. (Member)
BES Investimento do Brasil, S.A. (Chairman)           Board of General Meeting
                                                      Espart – Espírito Santo Participações Financeiras –
Board of General Meeting
                                                        Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
ESAF – Espírito Santo Gestão de Patrimónios, S.A        (Vice-Chairman)
 (Vice-Chairman)
                                                      Fiscal Board
                                                      Sporting Clube de Portugal (Vice-Chairman)
                                                      Sporting Sociedade Anónima Desportiva, SAD
                                                        (Member)

Jean-Luc Louis Marie Guinoiseau
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES
   Group
Board of Directors
Espírito Santo – Informática, ACE (Chairman)
ES Recuperação de Crédito, ACE (Chairman)




                                                    232
Rui Manuel Duarte Sousa da Silveira
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES       B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                 BES Group
Board of General Meeting                              Board of Directors
AVISTAR – S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)                   Cimigest – SGPS, S.A. (Member)
Banco Espírito Santo dos Açores, S.A. (Chairman)      Sociedade de Administração de Bens, Casa de
BES África, SGPS, S.A. (Chairman)                       Bons Ares, S.A. (Member)
BEST – Banco Electrónico de Serviço Total, S.A.       Sociedade de Silvicultura Monte do Arneirinho,
 (Chairman)                                             Lda. (Member)
ESAF – Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento          Fiscal Board
 Imobiliário, S.A. (Chairman)                         Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade, S.A.
ESAF – Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento           (Member)
 Mobiliário, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                      Board of General Meeting
ESAF – Espírito Santo Fundos de Pensões, S.A.
                                                      BES, Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Chairman)
 (Chairman)
                                                      Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
ESAF – Espírito Santo Participações
                                                       Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)
 Internacionais, Sociedade Gestora de
 Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)               Casa dos Pórticos – Sociedade de Administração de
                                                       Bens, S.A. (Secretary)
Capital Mais – Assessoria Financeira, S.A.
 (Chairman)                                           ESEGUR – Empresa de Segurança, S.A. (Vice-
                                                       Chairman)
ES Tech Ventures – SGPS, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                      Espírito Santo Equipamentos de Segurança, S.A.
ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros,
                                                        (Chairman)
 Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
 (Chairman)                                           Esumédica – Prestação de Serviços Médicos, S.A.
                                                        (Chairman)
ESAF – Espírito Santo Gestão de Patrimónios, S.A
 (Chairman)                                           Europ Assistance – Companhia Portuguesa de
                                                       Seguros de Assistência, S.A. (Vice-Chairman)
Espirito Santo Ventures – Sociedade de Capital de
  Risco, S.A (Chairman)                               Espírito Santo Saúde – Sociedade Gestora de
                                                        Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                      TC Turismo Capital, SCR, SA. (Chairman)
                                                      TF Turismo Fundos – SGFII, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                      Oblog Consulting, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                      Partran – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                                        Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                      T-Vida – Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Chairman)




                                                    233
Joaquim Aníbal Brito Freixial de Goes
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES       B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                 BES Group
Board of Directors                                    Board of Directors
Espírito Santo Ventures – Sociedade de Capital de     BES – Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Member)
  Risco, S.A. (Member)                                Glintt – Global Intelligent Technologies, SGPS,
                                                       S.A. (Member)
                                                      Portugal Telecom, Sociedade Gestora de
                                                        Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)
                                                      Fiscal Board
                                                      Centro Social e Paroquial de Nossa Senhora da
                                                       Ajuda (Chairman)
                                                      Fundação da Universidade Católica Portuguesa
                                                        (Chairman)


Pedro José de Sousa Fernandes Homem
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES       B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                 BES Group
Board of Directors                                    Board of Directors
AVISTAR – SGPS, S.A. (Member)                         Spinnaker Global Opportunity Fund Ltd. (Member)
Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, S.A. (Member)        Other positions
BES África, SGPS, S.A. (Member)                       Advita – Associação para o Desenvolvimento de
ESAF ― Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros,             Novas Iniciativas para a Vida (Substitute
 Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.      Director)
 (Member)
Espírito Santo Bank (USA) (Member)

Luís António Burnay Pinto de Carvalho Daun e Lorena
                                                Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                Group
                                                      Board of Directors
                                                      Campeque – Compra e Venda de Propriedades,
                                                       Lda. (Member)
                                                      Other positions
                                                      BES Seguros, Companhia de Seguros, S.A.
                                                       (Chairman of Remuneration Committee)
                                                      BES – Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A.
                                                       (Chairman of Remuneration Committee)




                                                    234
Ricardo Abecassis Espírito Santo Silva
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES       B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                 BES Group
Board of Directors                                    Board of Directors
AVISTAR – S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)                     Agriways, S.A. (Brazil) (Vice-Chairman)
Banco Espírito Santo de Angola, SARL (Chairman)       Bradespar, S.A. (Brazil) (Member)
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Vice-     Câmara Portuguesa de Comércio no Brasil
 Chairman)                                              (Member)
BES Finance Limited (Member)                          Europ Assistance (Brazil) (Member)
BES Investimento do Brasil, S.A. (Member)             Espírito Santo Control, S.A. (Member)
                                                      Espírito Santo Industrial (Member)
Espírito Santo Investimentos, S.A. (Brazil)
  (Chairman)                                          Espírito Santo International, S.A (Member)
Espírito Santo Bank (USA) (Vice-Chairman)             Espírito Santo Property (Brazil), S.A., (Member)
                                                      Espírito Santo Resources Limited (Member)
Executive Committee
                                                      Euroamerican Finance Corporation, Inc. (BVI)
BES Investimento do Brasil, S.A. (Chairman)             (Member)
Espírito Santo Investimentos, S.A (Brazil)            Novagest Assets Management Ltd. (Member)
  (Chairman)
                                                      Companhia Brasileira de Desenvolvimento
GESPAR S/C Ltda. (Brazil) (Member)                      Imobiliário Turístico – Invest Tur Brasil
Fiscal Board                                            (Member) (Note: on 12.01.2010 the company
                                                        changed its name to BHG – Brazil Hospitality
Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, S.A. (Chairman)        Group)
                                                      Monteiro Aranha, S.A. (Brazil) (Member)
                                                      Pojuca, S.A. (Brazil) (Chairman)
                                                      Ushuaia – Gestão e Trading International Limited
                                                        (Member)
                                                      Executive Committee
                                                      Associação Espírito Santo Cultura (Brazil)
                                                        (Member)
                                                      Companhia Agrícola Botucatu (Chairman)
                                                      E.S. Holding Administração e Participações, S.A.
                                                        (Brazil) (Chairman)
                                                      ESAI – Espírito Santo Activos Imobiliários Ltda.
                                                        (Brazil) (Member)
                                                      ESAP Brasil Agro-Pecuária Ltda. (Member)
                                                      ESAP Espírito Santo Agro-Pecuária, S.A.
                                                        (Uruguay) (Member)
                                                      ESCAE – Administração e Participações Ltda.
                                                        (Brazil) (Member)
                                                      ES Consultoria, Ltda. (Brazil) (Member)
                                                      InterAtlântico S.A. (Brazil) (Chairman)
                                                      Pojuca Administração, S.A. (Brazil) (Chairman)
                                                      Saramagos, S.A. Empreendimentos e Participações
                                                        (Brazil) (Member)
                                                      Fiscal Board
                                                      Banco Bradesco, S.A. (Member)
                                                      Advisory Board
                                                      Associação Brasileira de Bancos Internacionais,
                                                       S.A (Member)


                                                    235
José Manuel Ruivo da Pena
                                                       Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                       Group
                                                       Fiscal Board
                                                       BES, Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                       BES – Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A.
                                                        (Chairman)
                                                       Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade, S.A.
                                                        (Chairman)
                                                       Partran – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                                         Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)


Amílcar Carlos Ferreira de Morais Pires
A Corporate positions held in companies of BES         B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
  Group                                                   BES Group
Board of Directors                                     Board of Directors
AVISTAR – S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)                    BES – Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A
Bank Espírito Santo International Limited               (Member)
 (Chairman)                                            Portugal Telecom, SGPS, S.A. (Member)
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A.
 (Member)
Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, S.A. (Member)
BES África, SGPS, S.A. (Member)
BES Finance Limited (Member)
ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros –
 Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
 (Member)
BIC – International Bank, Limited (Chairman)
Espírito Santo PLC (Member)
Espírito Santo – Empresa de Prestação de Serviços,
  2, ACE (Member)
ES Tech Ventures – Sociedade Gestora de
 Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)




                                                     236
Bernard Delas*
                                                                  Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                                  Group
                                                                  Board of Directors
                                                                  BES – Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Vice-
                                                                   Chairman)
                                                                  BES – Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Vice-
                                                                   Chairman)
                                                                  Crédit Agricole Assurances S.p.A. (Vice-Chairman)
                                                                  Crédit Agricole Life a.d.o. (Serbia) (Chairman of
                                                                   the Supervisory Board)
                                                                  Crédit Agricole Risk Insurance (Luxembourg)
                                                                   (Member)
                                                                  Crédit Agricole Vita S.p.A. (Vice-Chairman)
                                                                  Gimar Finance SCA (France) (Member of the
                                                                   Supervisory Board)
                                                                  Pacifica (France) (Member)
                                                                  CACI Life S.A. (Member) (Note: terminated
                                                                   functions on 31.12.2009)
                                                                  CACI Non Life, S.A. (Member) (Note: terminated
                                                                   functions on 31.12.2009)
                                                                  CACI RE, S.A. (Member) (Note: terminated
                                                                   functions on 31.12.2009)
                                                                  Space Holding (Ireland) (Director) (Note:
                                                                    terminated functions on 31.12.2009)
                                                                  Other positions
                                                                  Crédit Agricole Assurances (Head of International
                                                                   Division)

*   renounced his position as a non executive member of the board of directors on 5th February, 2010 and was substituted by Jean-
    Yves Hocher

Nuno Maria Monteiro Godinho de Matos
Holds no positions in other companies.

João Eduardo Moura da Silva Freixa
Corporate positions held in companies of BES
Group
Board of Directors
Banco Espírito Santo dos Açores, S.A. (Vice-
 Chairman)




                                                             237
Bernard Octave Mary*
                                                                 A. Corporate positions held in companies outside
                                                                    BES Group
                                                                 Board of Directors
                                                                 Association Industries et Agro-Ressources (Vice-
                                                                  Chairman)
                                                                 Cariparma e Piacenza S.p.A. (Member)
                                                                 Crédit Agricole Creditor Insurance (Member)
                                                                 Crédit Agricole Egypt S.A.E (Member)
                                                                 Crédit Agricole, S.A. (Executive Vice President in
                                                                  charge of the commercial banking area (LCL,
                                                                  international commercial banking, micro finance,
                                                                  member of the Executive Committee, member of
                                                                  the General Management Board)
                                                                 Crédit du Maroc (Member of the Supervisory
                                                                  Board)
                                                                 Emporiki Bank (Member)
                                                                 LCL – Le Credit Lyonnais (Member)
                                                                 Le Clos Barrois (Manager)
                                                                 LESICA (Chairman)

*   On 16th July, 2010, Bernard Octave Mary resigned from his position as a non executive board member. On 30th July, BES Board
    of Directors co-opted Marc Olivier Tristan Oppenheim to fill the vacant position of non executive board member.


Michel Joseph Paul Goutorbe
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES                  B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                         BES Group
Board of Directors                                               Board of Directors
ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros –                      BES – Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Member
 Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.                 and Chairman of the Executive Committee)
 (Member)                                                        BES, Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Member and
Espírito Santo Ventures, Sociedade de Capital de                  Chairman of the Executive Committee)
  Risco, S.A. (Member)                                           Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
ES Tech Ventures – Sociedade Gestora de                           Sociais, S.A. (Member)
 Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)                            Portuguese-French Chamber of Commerce
                                                                   (Member)


Pedro Mosqueira do Amaral
A. Corporate positions held in companies of BES                  B. Corporate positions held in companies outside
   Group                                                            BES Group
Board of Directors                                               Board of Directors
BES Beteiligungs GmbH (Member)                                   Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie (Member)
Bank Espírito Santo International Limited
 (Member)




                                                            238
Isabel Maria Osório de Antas Mégre de Sousa Coutinho
                                                 Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                 Group
                                                 Associação Novo Futuro (IPSS) (Chairman of the
                                                  Board of Directors)
                                                  Instituto de Negociação e Vendas (Member of the
                                                    Advisory Board)

João de Faria Rodrigues
                                                  Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                  Group
                                                  Fiscal Board
                                                  Partran – Sociedade Gestora de Participações
                                                    Sociais, S.A. (Member)
                                                  T-Vida Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Member)
                                                  Seguros LOGO, S.A. (Member)


José de Albuquerque Epifânio da Franca
                                                  Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                  Group
                                                  Board of Directors
                                                  Auxineon Pte Ltd. (Singapore) (Member)


Luiz Carlos Trabuco Cappi *
                                                  Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                  Group
                                                  Board of Directors
                                                  Banco Bradesco S.A. (Member)
                                                  Bradesco Leasing S.A. Arrendamento Mercantil
                                                   (Member)
                                                  Bradespar S.A. (Member)
                                                  Cidade de Deus – Companhia Comercial de
                                                    Participações (Member)
                                                  Elo Participações e Investimentos S.A. (Member)
                                                  Fundação Instituto de Moléstias do Aparelho
                                                    Digestivo e da Nutrição (Member)
                                                  Odontoprev, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                  Fundo Garantidor de Créditos – FGC (Executive
                                                    Member)
                                                  Deliberating Board
                                                  Caixa Beneficente dos Funcionários do Bradesco
                                                   (Member)
                                                  Management Board
                                                  Federação Brasileira de Bancos (FEBRABAN)
                                                    (Member)




                                               239
Luiz Carlos Trabuco Cappi * (Continued)
                                                                  Corporate positions held in companies outside BES
                                                                  Group
                                                                  Executive Committee
                                                                  Banco Bradesco S.A. (Chairman)
                                                                  Banco Bankpar S.A. (Chairman)
                                                                  Banco Bradesco BBI S.A. (Chairman)
                                                                  Banco Bradesco Cartões S.A. (Chairman)
                                                                  Banco Bradesco Financiamentos, S.A. (Chairman)
                                                                  BEM – Distribuidora de Títulos e Valores
                                                                   Mobiliários Ltda. (Chairman)
                                                                  Bradesco Administradora de Consórcios Ltda.
                                                                   (Chairman)
                                                                  Bradesco Leasing S.A. Arrendamento Mercantil
                                                                   (Chairman)
                                                                  Bradescor Corretora de Seguros Ltda. (Chairman)
                                                                  Bram – Bradesco Asset Management S.A.DVTM
                                                                   (Chairman)
                                                                  Elo Participações e Investimentos S.A. (Member)
                                                                  Fundação Bradesco (Managing Director)
                                                                  Fundação Instituto de Moléstias do Aparelho
                                                                    Digestivo e da Nutrição (Managing Director)
                                                                  NCF Participações S.A. (Member)
                                                                  Nova Cidade de Deus Participações S.A. (Member)
                                                                  Top Club Bradesco, Segurança, Educação e
                                                                    Assistência Social (Member)
                                                                  Board of the General Meeting
                                                                  Fundação Bradesco (Member)
                                                                  Other positions
                                                                  ANSP – Academia Nacional de Seguros e
                                                                   Previdência (Member do of the Institutional
                                                                   Board)
                                                                  Association Internationale pour l’Étude de
                                                                   l’Assurance – Association de Genève, Geneva,
                                                                   Switzerland (Executive Member)
                                                                  Banco Bradesco S.A. (Coordinator of the
                                                                   Integrated Risk Management and Capital
                                                                   Allocation Committee and Member of the
                                                                   Remuneration Committee)
                                                                  Confederação Nacional das Instituições Financeiras
                                                                   – CNF (Vice Chairman of the Council of
                                                                   Representatives)
                                                                  Federação Brasileira de Bancos (FEBRABAN)
                                                                    (Member of the Advisory Board)

*   Luiz Cappi renounced his position as a non executive board member. BES Board of Directors co-opted Antonio Bornia to fill the
    vacant position of non executive board member.

The business address for all the above Directors is Avenida da Liberdade, 195, 1250-195, Lisbon, Portugal.



                                                             240
Statutory Auditor
                                                                                                                A4.2.1
The Statutory Auditor (Revisor Oficial de Contas), appointed by the General Meeting for the 2008-2011
                                                                                                                A11.2.1
four-year mandate, is KPMG & Associados SROC, S.A., which is a member of the Portuguese Institute of
Statutory Auditors (“Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais de Contas”), with registered office at Edifício
Monumental, Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11°, 1069 – 006 Lisbon, Portugal, represented by Silvia Cristina
de Sá Velho Corrêa da Silva Gomes (Revisor Oficial de Contas), who is also a member of the Portuguese
Institute of Statutory Auditors. The alternate member is Jean-Éric Gaign.

6.    Risk Management
Efficient risk management and control has played a fundamental role in the balanced and sustained growth
of the BES Group. The BES Group seeks to achieve the optimal balance of risks and returns with a goal of
achieving sustained high return on equity. The BES Group’s risk management strategy is consistent with the
regulatory and economic vision implicit in the new regulatory framework proposed by the Basel Committee.
Pursuant to this strategy, the BES Group monitors and evaluates risk on a group-wide basis, which enables
management to actively control the impact of the identified and measured risks on the results of the BES
Group.

The Executive Committee of the Board of Directors of BES is responsible for establishing the general
principles of risk management and control, defining the objective risk profile for the BES Group, including
establishing both global and specific risk limits and ensuring that the BES Group has the necessary
competences and resources for the purpose.

At a more specialised level, the Risk Committee is responsible for monitoring the evolution of the BES
Group’s integrated risk profile, and for proposing methodologies, policies, procedures and instruments to
deal with all types of risk faced by the BES Group. The Risk Committee holds monthly meetings, which are
attended by the Chairman of the Executive Committee.

Daily Financial and Credit Committee: its meetings are attended by members of the Executive Committee
and heads of departments; the main credit operations are submitted to and decided by this committee, in
accordance with established risk policies, it also monitors the treasury position and the evolution of the
financial markets.

ALCO (Assets and Liabilities Committee): holds monthly meetings, which are attended by the members of
the Executive Committee, including its Chairman, and is responsible for managing market, interest rate and
liquidity risk.

The management of risk on the BES Group level, both in Portugal and in the various jurisdictions in which
the BES Group operates, is centralised in the Global Risk Department. The Global Risk Department must
ensure:

•     independence relative to the other areas of the Group and credibility with the management and
      supervisory bodies, shareholders, investors and regulators; the GRD has no decision powers over
      specific operations;

•     the integrated and global management of all types of risk (credit, market, liquidity, interest rate and
      operational risk, at both domestic and international level) and consistency in direct risk and return
      comparisons; and

•     consistent incorporation of risk and capital concepts in the strategy and business decisions of the
      entire BES Group.

In addition to the risk management structure implemented by the BES Group, the BES Group relies on its
senior management to help monitor risk. The senior management of the BES Group companies and
international branches and the managing directors in each business department within the BES Group have
extensive knowledge of the markets and activities in which they operate. BES’s senior management assist
BES in monitoring and evaluating risk as well as augmenting and implementing the active risk management
policies and procedures implemented by the official risk management entities.


                                                    241
The New Capital Accord (Basel II)
BES Group fully recognises the challenges and opportunities that arise from application of the New Capital
Accord. Matching regulatory vision with the economic perspective implicit in the new regulatory framework
proposed by the Basel Committee – whose principles underlie the Group’s rationale and practices – creates
new opportunities and constitutes a stimulus to the effort made over the last few years in the area of Risk
Management.

In 2003, the BES Group set a target to adopt the IRB Foundation approach for Credit Risk and the
Standardised Approach for Operational Risk. Since then the Group has invested heavily in the Basel II
Project, namely in the development of technical platforms and the reinforcement of human resources
competencies.

One of the main priorities of the Basel II Project was to consolidate the development and fine-tuning of
internal risk analysis models, in particular risk rating systems. At the same time, major developments in
information systems were required, which included centralising information at Group-wide level. Finally, the
introduction of risk metrics and criteria in the day-to-day decision-making processes was reinforced. To this
end, management practices, policies and procedures had to be adapted in order to ensure that risk assessment
was explicitly considered in the decision-making process.

All the methodologies, practices, policies and procedures developed were implemented consistently across
BES Group’s branches and subsidiaries to standardise risk management through all the business areas of the
Group.

The Group was authorised by the Bank of Portugal to use, as of the fourth quarter in 2009, the Internal
Ratings Based (IRB) approach for credit risk and the Standardised Approach – TSA method for operational
risk. This placed the BES Group in a leadership position in terms of risk management and in line with the
best practices at the international level.

According to the regulations, the recently approved IRB approach implies utilisation of internal estimates of
default probabilities as well as estimates of loss given default(s) and conversion factors for the retail
segments (IRB Advanced). For the remaining segments the same authorisation will allow the utilisation of
internal estimates for default probabilities (IRB Foundation).

Risk Types

Credit Risk
Credit risk represents the potential financial loss arising from the failure of an obligor or counterparty to
honour its contractual obligation with the BES Group.

Credit portfolio management is an ongoing process that requires interaction between the various teams
responsible for the management of risk during the consecutive stages of the credit process. This approach is
complemented by the continuous introduction of improvements in the risk control methodologies, risk
assessment and control tools, as well as in procedures and decision circuits.

Internal Risk Rating Systems
Internal rating systems fall into the following two large categories, according to their specific characteristics
in terms of development and use:

1.     Internal Rating Models for Corporate Credit Portfolios
Corporate credit portfolios are approached differently, according to client and/or transaction size and
industry sector, using different models specifically adapted for the relevant credit portfolio. For large
companies, financial institutions, institutional clients, local and regional administration and specialised
finance (i.e. project and leveraged finance), credit ratings are assigned by a rating desk, which is currently
organised into several teams: teams that specialise in different industry sectors; teams that specialise in rating
project finance transactions and financial institutions; and teams that validate ratings submitted by credit
analysts in the BES Group’s London and New York branches and in BES Investimento do Brasil. To assign


                                                       242
internal risk ratings to these risk segments, classified as low default portfolios, these teams use expert-based
systems (templates) that include quantitative and qualitative variables linked to the industry sector. Except
for specialised finance, the rating methodology used by the rating desk includes a risk analysis of the
maximum consolidation scope, identifying the status of each subsidiary within the respective conglomerate,
which could impact the final rating decision. The activity templates and rules-based templates described
above have been aligned to best practice at one of the main international rating agencies. For the middle
market segment (medium-sized companies), the BES Group uses statistical rating models, which combine
financial information with qualitative data. The disclosure of risk ratings requires a previous validation by a
team of risk analysts, who also take into account behavioural factors and draw up risk analysis reports
containing their opinions on the proposed operations. In the small businesses segment, ratings are
determined not only on the basis of financial and qualitative analysis, but also according to the track record
of the company and its partners. Specific rating models have also been implemented to quantify the risk
inherent in the financing of start-ups. In the real estate sector (particularly in the case of small and medium-
sized real estate companies), in light of the sector’s unique characteristics, ratings are assigned centrally by
a specialised team, using quantitative and technical variables (property valuation) as well as qualitative
variables. This team is also responsible for making the risk analyses included in specialised credit proposals
(e.g. construction financing).

2.     Internal Scoring for Retail Clients’ Credit Portfolios
The BES Group uses origination and behavioural scoring models for the main products offered to its
individual clients – mortgage loans, consumer loans, credit cards, overdrafts and loan accounts – whose
ratings are calibrated to a probability of default within one year. The models’ predictive capacity is subject
to monitoring on a regular basis. Besides estimating the probability of default, the BES Group also regularly
monitors other parameters required for risk quantification and management, namely losses at default and
exposure at default figures (“LGD” and “EAD”). All the rating and scoring models described above play a
key role, not only in the technical analysis of risk, but also in the credit risk approval and monitoring
processes. These rating and scoring models were also applied in the pre-approved loan campaigns launched
by the BES Group in the course of 2008. In accordance with the new rules on regulatory capital requirements
(Basel II) and following current risk management practices, the validation and, as appropriate, the re-
calibration of models are carried out on an annual basis. The global internal validation exercise of the various
rating and scoring models used for the main credit portfolios, carried out by the BES Group in 2008, showed
that the models maintain a good capacity to discriminate risk and therefore remain valid.

Loan Granting
The vast set of initiatives undertaken in recent years, within the scope of the global project of revising and
adapting the credit granting process in the various commercial segments of the BES Group, combined with
the near full coverage of credit exposures by internal rating/scoring classifications, have allowed for the loan
granting process at the BES Group to be supported by the widespread use of risk-adjusted return metrics.
Across nearly all the commercial segments, rating/scoring classifications are now directly incorporated into
the definition of credit powers at the various decision-taking levels in terms of both exposures and pricing.
The use of rating/scoring classifications was also introduced for the purpose of establishing portfolio limits
that limit credit granting by both product and segment, and in particular restrict the amounts lent when higher
risks are involved. Compliance with the established limits is monitored on a regular monthly basis by the
Risk Committee.

Credit Risk Monitoring
The monitoring and control activities currently established by the BES Group aim to quantify and control
the credit risk, to allow early definition and implementation of concrete measures to deal with specific
situations indicative of a deterioration of risk, with a view to mitigating potential losses. In this context, and
with the central aim of preserving the BES Group’s risk quality and standards, the credit risk monitoring
function and its development are considered to be one of the most important priorities of the risk
management and control system.




                                                       243
Recovery Process
The entire recovery process is developed based on the concept of “integrated client”. Whether in a corporate
or retail segment, each client is assigned a “recoverer” that monitors all this client’s credits subject to
recovery. In view of its nature and volumes involved, credit to individual clients is in some phases treated in
an automatic and industrialised fashion, while a customised approach is used to treat credit to corporate
clients.

Throughout the process, the possibilities of reaching an agreement are weighed and legal action taken
whenever required to recover the credits and defend the Group’s rights. However, there is constant openness
to consider solutions permitting a return to a non-default situation and therefore to maintain the client.

Market Risk
Market risk is the possible loss resulting from an adverse change in the value of a financial instrument due
to fluctuations in interest rates, foreign exchange rates, share prices or commodities prices.

Management Practices
Market risk management is integrated with balance sheet management through the ALCO. This committee
is responsible for defining policies for the structuring and composition of the balance sheet, and for the
control of exposures to interest rate, foreign exchange and liquidity risk.

The main measure of market risk is the assessment of potential losses under adverse market conditions, for
which the Value at Risk (VaR) valuation criteria is used. BES Group’ VaR model uses the Monte Carlo
simulation, based on a confidence level of 99 per cent. and an investment period of 10 days. Volatilities and
correlations are historical, based on an observation period of one year.

To improve on VaR assessment, other initiatives have been developed, namely back testing, which consists
in comparing the losses foreseen by VaR with actual losses. These exercises permit to fine-tune the model
and improve its predictive capabilities.

As a complement to the VaR model, stress testing has also been developed, which permit to assess the impact
of higher potential losses than those considered using VaR valuation.

Interest Rate Risk
Interest rate risk may be defined as the impact on shareholders’ equity or on net interest income due to an
adverse change in market interest rates.

Management Practices
Given its importance to the BES Group, interest rate risk is monitored by ALCO, namely through the
monitoring of net interest income and using repricing tables. In accordance with the recommendations of
Basel II (Pillar 2) and Bank of Portugal’s Instruction no. 19/2005, as amended, the BES Group’s exposure
to interest rate risk is calculated based on Bank of International Settlements (“BIS”) methodology,
classifying all Assets, Liabilities and off balance sheet items, excluding those from trading sources, by
repricing schedules.

The model used is similar to the duration model, using a stress testing scenario corresponding to a parallel
movement of 200 basis points in the yield curve for all interest rate levels.

Interest rate risk measurement basically consists in determining the effect of that change in interest rates on
the institution’s shareholders’ equity and annualised net interest income.

Liquidity Risk
Liquidity risk arises from present or future inability to pay liabilities as they mature without resulting in
exaggerated losses. Banks, by virtue of their business of providing long-term loans and receiving short-term
deposits, are subject to liquidity risk. In recent years most banks have increasingly resorted to obtaining
funds from market sources instead of from their traditional sources (retail deposits), especially in countries


                                                     244
where savings are typically scarce due to economic stagnation, as is the case in Portugal. It is therefore
important for banks to maintain a prudent and sound management of their liquidity risk, particularly in times
of market turmoil.

Management Practices
Liquidity risk management, which is centralised in the Financial Department, focuses on maintaining surplus
liquidity in the short term and involves the following tasks:

•      drawing up an annual financial plan based on the approved budget. Based on projected funding needs,
       an annual plan of debt issues and securitisations is drawn up. This plan is monitored on a regular basis
       and revised in the course of the year, as necessary;

•      monitoring and controlling liquidity risk, a vital task for the BES Group. The aim is to maintain
       adequate liquidity levels to meet the BES Group’s short-term funding needs, and make sure that it
       refinances its current activity in due time, optimising cost and maturities. Several tools are used for
       this purpose, namely liquidity gaps and liquidity ratios; and

•      carrying out stress tests based on extreme but plausible scenarios where additional funding is required,
       with the aim of pre-empting any constraints liable to affect the BES Group’s liquidity.

Operational Risk
Operational risk represents the risk of losses or of a negative impact on the relationship with the Clients or
other stakeholders resulting from inadequate or negligent application of internal procedures, or from people
behaviour, information systems, or external events. Operational risk also includes the business/strategic risk,
i.e., the risk of losses thorough fluctuations in volume/business/earnings/prices or costs.

Legal risk is also included in the above definition. Legal risk represents the risk of losses arising from non
compliance with the regulations in force (due to inadequate document retention, failure to change processes
as required by new legislation and/or differences in the interpretation of the law) or resulting from legal
action.

To manage operational risk, BES Group implemented a system that standardises, systematises and regulates
the frequency of actions viewing the identification, monitoring, control and mitigation of risk.

These processes are part of a management model comprising two broad areas: the first concerns the
collection and treatment of information, using tools that permit to identify and monitor risk; the second uses
the information that has been duly processed for the efficient management of risk, monitoring the more
critical situations and implementing the risk management strategy. These two broad areas are coordinated
through reporting to senior management and the monitoring of the mitigation measures determined.

7.     Funding
The BES Group establishes a funding policy for all types of liabilities, from customer funding (customer
deposits) to issuing ordinary and preferred shareholders’ equity and the use of financing instruments in the
financial markets. The funding mechanisms used by the BES Group include interbank lines, certificates of
deposit and commercial paper programmes (ECP and USCP) for short-term funding, and the Euro Medium
Term Notes programme (for issuing senior and subordinated debt), credit lines, covered bonds and other
instruments for medium- and long-term funding.

In light of extreme volatility and disruption in the global capital and credit markets in the recent past, the BES
Group actively continued to promote the diversification of its funding sources as part of its prudent liquidity
management policy in order to ensure a high-quality, liquid asset base. To strengthen its liquidity position and
reinforce contingency tools under stress scenarios the BES Group has undertaken additional funding
initiatives, such as increasing assets eligible for rediscount with the ECB and the Federal Reserve notably
through securitising portions of its securities and loan portfolio. Additionally, in 2009, the BES Group
increased its repoable assets from €8.7 billion to €9.3 billion, of which €4.4 billion are eligible for rediscount
with the ECB. Throughout 2009, moreover, the BES Group executed its medium- and long-term funding plan


                                                       245
in excess of its refinancing requirements by taking advantage of the few windows of opportunity that appeared
in the international wholesale funding markets during the course of the year.

At the beginning of January 2009 BES successfully issued a €1.5 billion Fixed Rate Note with a three year
maturity guaranteed by the Portuguese Republic. The second quarter saw a decline in risk aversion among
investors which allowed for the re-emergence of non guaranteed bank issues of senior debt, with the amount
issued more than doubling between the first and the second quarter of 2009. Taking advantage of the
favourable market condition, in May 2009 BES issued €1,750 million senior debt under its EMTN
programme with a five year maturity.

The capital markets continued to show signs of improvement through the rest of the year, allowing BES
Group to make several private placements of debt, and in November an issue of senior debt under the EMTN
programme in the amount of €1.0 billion and maturity of three years and three months. The total amount
issued in 2009 reached €7.0 billion. The transactions made by the BES Group in the international markets
during 2009 once again allowed it to carry short term excess liquidity. At the same time on-balance sheet
customer funds grew strongly, rising by 8.6 per cent. year-on-year, while on-balance sheet customer loans
increased by only 4.8 per cent.

Although customer funds represented by deposits and capital guaranteed securities increased and remained
the BES Group’s main funding source, their relative weight in the Group’s funding structure declined by 4
per cent., to 59 per cent. This was due to the amount of operations carried out in the capital markets noting
not only the refinancing of medium and long term issues which came to maturity but also the reinforcement
of short-term liquidity levels. Hence the relative weight of medium and long term funds increased from 25
per cent. to 27 per cent. at the end of 2009. Finally, as a result of the capital increase, the share represented
by the BES Group’s own funds rose from 12 per cent. to 14 per cent. of the total funding sources.

The following table shows all of the BES Group’s sources of funds as at 31st December, 2009, 2008 and
2007:

Funding Sources                                                         2007              2008             2009
Medium/long-term funds                                              13,407           15,375            19,497
Euro medium-term notes & extendible notes                           11,000           13,442            17,712
Medium and long-term deposits with credit institutions               2,407            1,933             1,785
On-balance sheet customer funds                                     37,060           38,189            41,473
Capital instruments                                                  7,509            7,484             9,578
                                                                   ————             ————              ————
Total                                                               57,975           61,048            70,548
                                                                   ————             ————
On-balance sheet customer funds represented by deposits and capital guaranteed securities represented
                                                                                                      ————
59 per cent. of the total of the funding sources in 2009 and 63 per cent. in 2008. Medium- and long-term
funds marginally increased their weight from 25 per cent. to 27 per cent. of the total of the funding sources,
while the BES Group’s own funds marginally decreased their weight from 13 per cent. in 2008 to 14 per
cent. in 2009.

With regard to customer funding, the BES Group’s strategy, as defined by the ALCO committee, relies on
coordinated action at the following levels:

•       obtaining on-balance sheet funds through traditional products, such as deposits and certificates of
        deposits;

•       issuance of bonds and medium-term capital guaranteed structured products for placing with
        customers;

•       asset management; and

•       distribution of bancassurance products.




                                                      246
8.      Human Resources
Human Resources are a key strategic factor of development, either as a driver of change and progress or as
an active agent of organisational restructuring. The BES Group’s human resources strategy relies on the
promotion of intellectual capital as a brand differentiation factor.

Over the last few years several measures were taken to ensure the continuous training of the employees and
consequently their mobility within the BES Group, as well as the rejuvenation and strengthening of the
workforce.

The BES Group’s management model for Human Resources is based on decentralised management, based
on the definition of strategic principles which are adopted and implemented in each of its subsidiaries
according to the respective specificities and geographical location.

On 31st December, 2009, BES Group had 9,359 employees distributed by four continents. Of these, 7,794
(83.3 per cent.) worked in Portugal and 1,565 (16.7 per cent.) were based abroad.

                                                                   2007             2008             2009
Portugal                                                         8,196           7,942            7,794
Rest of Europe                                                     600             717              724
Spain                                                              512             602              601
UK                                                                  48              55               59
Other European Countries                                            40              60               64
Africa                                                             376             433              463
South Ameria                                                       159             168              191
North America                                                      133             150              168
Asia                                                                17              21               19
                                                               ————            ————             ————
Total                                                            9,481           9,431            9,359
                                                               ————            ————             ————
9.      Financial Statements of BES Group                                                                    A11.11.1
                                                                                                             A11.11.2
The consolidated financial statements for the years ended 31st December, 2008 and 2009 and the financial
                                                                                                             A11.111.3.3
information in the Q2 Announcement were prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted for use in the
                                                                                                             A11.11.5.1
European Union (IFRS).
                                                                                                             A11.11.5.2




                                                   247
Consolidated Balance Sheet
For the six months period ended 30th June, 2010 and the years ended 31st December, 2009 and
31st December, 2008
                                                                30th June, 31st December, 31st December,
                                                                     2010             2009         2008
                                                                            (in thousands of Euro)
ASSETS
Cash and deposits at central banks                              1,943,001        2,192,317      2,027,318
Deposits with banks                                               500,858          610,574        664,410
Financial assets held for trading                               5,966,222        4,459,484      3,690,162
Financial assets as fair value through profit or loss           1,611,266        1,002,301      2,161,813
Available-for-sale financial assets                           10,114,794         8,531,600      7,094,111
Loans and advances to banks                                     3,569,738        7,997,807      4,531,983
Loans and advances to customers                               51,673,579       48,978,847     47,049,474
Held-to-maturity investments                                    2,757,451        2,541,829      2,160,196
Derivatives for risk management purpose                           532,552          455,115        936,290
Non-current assets held for sale                                  486,369          407,585        270,888
Property and equipment                                            746,402          658,773        638,487
Intangible assets                                                 152,763          137,885        124,216
Investments in associates                                         851,866          793,815        644,506
Current income tax assets                                          24,688           20,929         52,721
Deferred income tax assets                                        237,180          187,871        141,753
Other assets                                                    3,704,856        3,320,468      2,998,400
                                                              —————            —————          —————
Total Assets                                                   84,873,585       82,297,200     75,186,728

LIABILITIES
                                                              ————— ————— —————
Deposits from central banks                                     8,995,743        3,817,643      4,810,458
Financial liabilities held for trading                          2,169,271        1,561,143      1,914,423
Deposits from banks                                             7,112,438        6,895,720      7,681,738
Due to customers                                              26,082,073       25,446,450     26,386,754
Debt securities issued                                        29,451,274       33,101,099     24,596,682
Derivatives for risk management purpose                           241,304          253,148        727,475
Non-current liabilities held for sale                              35,217           21,609         12,827
Provisions                                                        179,572          179,851        131,211
Current income tax liabilities                                     96,655          133,616         89,515
Deferred income tax liabilities                                    92,082           79,216         37,448
Subordinated debt                                               2,305,591        2,639,071      2,828,983
Other liabilities                                               1,197,386        1,229,751      1,316,270
                                                              —————            —————          —————
Total Liabilities                                              77,958,606       75,358,317     70,533,784

EQUITY
                                                              ————— ————— —————
Share capital                                                     3,500,000      3,500,000      2,500,000
Share premium                                                     1,085,396      1,085,399        668,851
Treasury stock                                                      (24,971)       (25,083)       (29,838)
Preference shares                                                   600,000        600,000        600,000
Fair value reserve                                                   59,703        300,833       (266,334)
Other reserves and retained earnings                              1,023,085        672,063        624,472
Profit for the period attributable to equity holders of the bank    282,178        522,114        402,284
Minority interest                                                   389,588        283,557        153,509
                                                                —————          —————          —————
Total Equity                                                      6,914,979      6,938,883      4,652,944
                                                                —————          —————          —————
Total Liabilities and Equity                                     84,873,585     82,297,200     75,186,728
                                                              ————— ————— —————
                                                        248
Consolidated Income Statement
For the six months period ended 30th June, 2010 and the years ended 31st December, 2009 and
31st December, 2008

                                                              30th June, 31st December, 31st December,
                                                                   2010             2009         2008
                                                                          (in thousands of Euro)
Interest and similar income                                  1,861,406        3,837,533     4,880,694
Interest expense and similar charges                         1,315,065        2,636,718     3,794,525
                                                            —————            —————         —————
Net interest income                                            546,341        1,200,815     1,086,169
Dividend income                                                 68,903           89,361        91,856
Fee and Comission income                                       426,651          786,453       709,359
Fee and comission expense                                      (55,940)        (106,311)     (110,153)
Net gains from financial assets at fair value
  through profit or loss                                          (49,845)      (51,412)      (97,474)
Net gains from available-for-sale financial assets                165,703       189,239       213,378
Net gains from foreign exchange differences                        17,404        58,533        25,619
Net gains/(losses) from the sale of other assets                   (3,242)      (27,377)       (4,153)
Other operating income and expense                                  4,857        95,831        (7,873)
                                                              —————          —————         —————
Operating income                                                1,120,832     2,235,132     1,906,728
                                                              —————          —————         —————
Staff costs                                                       298,959       565,895       521,050
General and administrative expenses                               213,893       402,554       402,645
Depreciation and amortisation                                      50,476        87,261        77,906
Provisions net of reversals                                        12,805        53,160        19,846
Loans impairment net of reversals                                 174,526       539,941       274,431
Impairment on other financial assets net of reversals              32,104        71,875        57,407
Impairment on other assets net of reversals                        19,338        43,798        24,183
                                                              —————          —————         —————
Operating expenses                                                802,101     1,764,484     1,377,468
                                                              —————          —————         —————
Gains on disposal of investments in subsidiaries ans associates         –       184,286         1,673
Share of profit of associates                                      20,759        29,977       (20,290)
                                                              —————          —————         —————
Profit Before Income tax                                          339,490       684,911       510,643
                                                              —————          —————         —————
Income tax
Current tax                                                        41,415      178,681       150,984
Deferred tax                                                      (19,899)     (68,862)      (67,486)
                                                              —————          —————         —————
                                                                   21,516      109,819        83,498
                                                              —————          —————         —————
Profit for the period                                             317,974      575,092       427,145

Attributable to equity holders of the Bank
                                                            ————— ————— —————
                                                              282,178          522,114       402,284
Attributable to minority interest                              35,796           52,978        24,861
                                                            —————            —————         —————
                                                              317,974          575,092       427,145
                                                            ————— ————— —————




                                                     249
Consolidated Cash Flow Statement
For the six months period ended 30th June, 2010 and the years ended 31st December, 2009 and 31st December,
2008
                                                                30th June,    31st December, 31st December,
                                                                     2010                2009         2008
                                                                               (in thousands of Euro)
Cash flows from operating activities
Interest and similar income received                             1,786,242        3,870,807       4,782,932
Interest expense and similar charges paid                       (1,316,102)      (2,659,680)     (3,733,296)
Fee and commission received                                        433,389          799,450         723,499
Fee and commission paid                                            (64,493)        (115,645)       (112,970)
Recoveries on loans previously written off                           9,817           16,442          21,954
Contribution to pension fund                                        (3,698)         (34,209)       (537,882)
Cash payments to employees and suppliers                          (391,277)      (1,041,955)       (475,620)
                                                               —————            —————           —————
                                                                   453,878          835,210         668,617
Changes in operational assets and liabilities:
Deposits with Central Banks                                      5,210,044       (1,028,824)      2,650,532
Financial assets at fair value through profit and loss          (1,351,083)        (128,946)       (164,940)
Loans and advances to banks                                      4,429,578       (3,475,332)      3,675,088
Deposit from banks                                                 196,182         (738,645)        553,681
Loans and advances to customers                                 (2,806,979)      (2,832,085)     (5,052,512)
Due to customers                                                   584,513         (901,056)      2,588,770
Derivatives for risk management purposes                           (77,424)        (100,526)          7,000
Other operating assets and liabilities                            (224,086)         522,549        (855,782)
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Net cash flow from operating activities before
  income taxes                                                  6,414,623        (7,847,655)     4,070,454
Income taxes paid                                                 (82,135)         (102,788)      (165,618)
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Net cash flow from operating activities                         6,332,488        (7,950,443)     3,904,836
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Cash flows from investing activities
Acquisition of subsidiaries and associates                        (105,353)        (179,428)        (74,756)
Disposal of subsidiaries and associates                                  –          265,457           6,133
Dividends received                                                  70,685           93,110         120,444
Acquisition of available-for-sale financial assets             (19,775,432)     (33,650,788)    (26,539,016)
Sale of available-for-sale financial assets                     17,984,688       32,767,567      24,174,702
Held to maturity investments                                      (188,667)        (394,728)     (1,188,807)
Acquisition of tangible and intangible assets                     (109,814)        (137,696)       (228,762)
Sale of tangible and intangible assets                                 580            3,718             522
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Net cash flow from investment activities                        (2,123,313)      (1,232,788)     (3,729,540)
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Cash flows from financing activities
Capital increase                                                         –        1,187,885               –
Proceeds from issue of bonds                                     5,870,225      16,785,095       11,997,337
Reimbursement of bonds                                         (10,008,884)      (8,293,666)    (12,192,096)
Proceeds from issue of subordinated debt                             4,279          257,133         780,882
Reimbursement of subordinated debt                                (340,449)        (401,919)       (154,456)
Treasury stock                                                         112            4,755          11,599
Dividends paid on ordinary shares                                 (163,178)         (79,656)       (238,856)
Dividends paid on preference shares                                (33,480)         (33,480)        (33,480)
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Net cash flow from financing activities                         (4,671,375)       9,426,147         170,930
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Net changes in cash and cash equivalents                          (462,200)         242,916         346,226

Cash and cash equivalents at the beginning of the period
                                                               ————— ————— —————
                                                                2,161,089        1,923,762       1,582,916
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents      148,154           (5,589)         (5,380)
Net changes in cash and cash equivalents                         (462,200)         242,916         346,226
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Cash and cash equivalents at the end of the period              1,847,043        2,161,089       1,923,762

Cash and cash equivalents includes:
                                                               ————— ————— —————
Cash                                                              202,099          218,595         249,979
Deposits with banks                                             1,740,902        1,973,722       1,777,339
Mandatory deposits with Central Banks                            (596,816)        (641,802)       (767,966)
Deposits with banks                                               500,858          610,574         664,410
                                                               —————            —————           —————
Total                                                           1,847,043        2,161,089       1,923,762
                                                               ————— ————— —————
                                                         250
10.   Recent Developments

Recent Developments
Banco Espírito Santo Group Activity and Results for the nine-months period ended 30th September,
2010
On 2nd November, 2010 BES announced its results for the third quarter of 2010, comprising the results for
the 9 months ended in September 2010. The following information is an extract of such disclosed results
which are incorporated by reference in this Prospectus:
“According to the information released net income of the Bank for this period reached EUR 405.4 million
(+12.4 per cent. YoY) corresponding to an annualised ROE of 9.1 per cent. (FY09: 10.0 per cent. or 8.8 per
cent. if excluding extraordinary results). The international area results confirm once again the success of the
internationalisation strategy of the Bank, with commercial banking income rising by 46.2 per cent. The
international area contributed with 41 per cent. to the Group’s net income (1H10: 34 per cent.; 9M09: 35 per
cent.).
In addition to the above, the disclosed results highlight the following core data:
•     Customer loans grew by 6.5 per cent. (Jun. 10: +9.7 per cent. YoY), driven by strong credit growth in
      the international area (+14.3 per cent. YoY). Corporate loans, the most dynamic component of credit,
      rose 8.9 per cent. YoY or EUR 3.1 billion.
•     Customer deposits increased by a significant 22.6 per cent. However, the reduction in debt securities
      placed with international clients as a consequence of the sovereign risk, namely certificates of
      deposits, caused on-balance sheet customer funds to decrease 2.3 per cent.
•     Underpinned by international area growth, commercial banking income increased by 2 per cent., in
      contrast to the previous quarters (1Q10: -8.3 per cent.; 1H10: -6.1 per cent.).
•     Operating costs increased 10.3 per cent., driven by a 36.3 per cent. increase of the international area’s
      costs, due to the international expansion programme. The Cost to Income, although increasing,
      remained below 50 per cent.
•     The credit provision charge in 9M10 was 65 bp (Sep. 09: 1.03 per cent., or 0.92 per cent. in a
      comparable basis), raising the balance of provisions to 3.27 per cent. of the credit portfolio (Sep. 09:
      2.91 per cent.).
•     The overdue loans ratio (>90 days) was 1.90 per cent. (Sep. 09: 1.56 per cent.), with a corresponding
      provision coverage of 172.5 per cent. (Sep. 09: 186.4 per cent.).
•     The Group’s liquidity has been relying less on funding from the ECB. The Group’s use of ECB funds
      dropped by EUR 1.7 billion in the quarter, from EUR 6 billion to EUR 4.3 billion on September 30th.
      The Group has a EUR 13.5 billion portfolio of repoable securities, o.w. EUR 9 billion eligible for
      rediscount with the ECB (net of haircuts).
•     The solvency ratio is 11.0 per cent., with Tier I standing at 8.3 per cent.
•     Also, the main equity exposures of the AFS portfolio show a potential gain of EUR 383 million (Jun.
      10: EUR 163 million).
•     The results of the stress tests performed in the European Union countries under the coordination of
      the CEBS, with the cooperation of the European Central Bank and the direct participation of the
      national supervision authorities, were disclosed on 23 July. The results of the tests performed to
      Espírito Santo Financial Group and Banco Espírito Santo confirm the strength of the two institutions
      under adverse scenarios.”

Rating revisions
On 14th July, 2010 and following the two-notch downgrade of the Portuguese government’s sovereign debt
to “A1” (from “Aa2”), Moody’s has downgraded BES’ long term debt and deposits ratings to A2/Prime-1
from A1/Prime-1, with a negative outlook. This downgrading action affected seven other Portuguese banks


                                                     251
and concluded the review for possible downgrade for eight banks that were placed on review on 5th May,
2010. As a result of the above, the Fixed Rate Note guaranteed by the Portuguese Republic and issued by
BES on January 2008 was also downgraded to A1 in line with the Portuguese government’s debt rating. This
downgrading action was justified by Moody’s as being a reflection of the Portuguese government’s reduced
ability to support its banks.

On 21st July, 2010 it was Fitch’s turn to review the rating of five Portuguese banks, in the context of which
BES’ rating was downgraded from “A+” to “A” with negative outlook. Fitch released this information in
respect of the Portuguese banks shortly before the announcement of the results of the stress tests to European
banks and according to this rating agency the revision of these ratings reflects the position of Portuguese
banks in the ongoing liquidity crisis in the market.

Acquisition of 25.1 per cent. of Moza Banco
On 26th July, 2010 BES informed the market about a Memorandum of Understanding signed through BES’
subsidiary company BES Africa S.G.P.S., SA for the acquisition of 25.1 per cent. of the share capital of
Moza Banco, SA, a Mozambican bank, founded in June 2008.

On 26th October, 2010 BES announced the agreement to acquire, through BES Africa, SGPS, SA, a stake
in Moza Banco, SA.

The referred transaction included the direct purchase of a 25.1 per cent. stake of Moza Banco current share
capital, for an equivalent price of approximately €7.1 million, as well as the simultaneous share capital
increase that BES would subscribe at the equivalent percentage of the share capital acquired (25.1 per cent.),
representing a total investment of approximately €8.1 million.

The final amount remained subject to any price adjustments, according to a comprehensive financial audit to
be held after completion of the transaction and the net result of Moza Banco in 2010.

The conclusion of the transaction was subject to a number of conditions that are common in this kind of
agreement, among which is the obtaining of consents, authorisations or not oppositions by the competent
supervisory authorities.

Acquisition of Gespastor
On 6th August, 2010 BES announced that ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos Financieros, S.A. (“ESAF Spain”),
through Espirito Santo Gestión, SGIIC, SA (“ES Gestión”), had agreed, on 5th August, 2010, to acquire
Banco Pastor’s fund manager Gespastor SGIIC, SA, for €25.75 million, of which half was to be paid on the
date of the transaction and the other half will be paid over a period of two years. This acquisition includes
an exclusive commercial agreement with Banco Pastor for a period of seven years.

ES Gestión is part of ESAF Espanha, a fully owned subsidiary of the BES Group. It is believed that the
acquisition of Gespastor SGIIC, SA will contribute to the growth of the BES Group asset management
business which, in Spain, is run through ES Gestión and ES Pensiones (“ESAF subsidiares”) and who have
€1.5 billion assets under management. This acquisition will result in the increase to more than €2.8 billion
of assets under the management of ES Gestión.

The acquisition of Gespastor was entered into subject to a number of conditions, including obtaining the
necessary authorisations and approvals from the relevant competent authorities.

Stress tests results
On 6th August, 2010 BES disclosed to the market the result of the stress test performed by the Bank of
Portugal, using the methodology and assumptions of the stress tests coordinated by the Committee of
European Banking Supervisors (“CEBS”). The stress test results were published by the Bank of Portugal on
http://www.bportugal.pt/en-US/OBancoeoEurosistema/ComunicadoseNotasdeInformacao/
Documents/combp20100806_en.pdf.




                                                     252
Establishment of a partnership with Bradesco and Banco do Brasil for African markets and
preparation of the acquisition of a stake in BES Africa
On 9th August, 2010 BES announced it had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Banco do Brasil
and Bradesco envisaging the definition of a common strategy for Africa. This partnership is in line with the
international strategy of BES which is mainly focused on Portugal, Brazil and Africa.

As a result of this partnership, Banco do Brasil and Bradesco will have a stake in BES Africa – the company
that holds the BES Group’s participations in African financial institutions. This holding is intended to
coordinate future investments of the three banking groups in Africa, including acquisitions of stakes in banks
and/or establishment of direct operations of the shareholders.

As a result of this partnership BES is expected to leverage the synergies arising from the increasing presence
of Portuguese and Brazilian companies in Africa.

11.   Supervision and Regulation
The Bank of Portugal
The Bank of Portugal is a part of the European System of Central Banks (“ESCB”), which was created in
connection with the European Economic and Monetary Union (“EMU”). The EMU implements a single
monetary policy, the main features of which are a single currency – the Euro – and the creation of a European
Central Bank (“ECB”) and the ESCB. According to the European Union (“EU”) Treaty, the primary
objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability through monetary policy.

The Bank of Portugal is directed to provide for the stability of the domestic financial system, performing for
this purpose the function of lender of last resort. This goal is achieved through the supervision of credit
institutions, financial companies and other entities subject to the supervision of the Bank of Portugal.

According to the Regime Geral das Instituições de Crédito e Sociedades Financeiras, the Legal Framework
of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies (enacted by Decree Law No. 298/92 of 31st December, 1992,
as amended from time to time), the Bank of Portugal authorises the establishment of credit institutions and
financial companies based on technical-prudential criteria, monitors the activity of the institutions under its
supervision and their compliance with the rules governing their activities, issues recommendations for the
correction of any deviations from such rules, sanctions breaches should they occur, and possesses the ability
to take extraordinary measures of reorganisation.

The Bank of Portugal has established rules governing solvency ratios, reserve requirements, control of major
risks and provisions for specific and general credit risks. It monitors compliance with these rules through
periodic inspections, review of regularly filed financial statements and reports, and continuing assessment of
adherence to current legislation.

The Bank of Portugal is also charged with the duty to regulate, oversee and promote the smooth operation
of payment systems, namely within the scope of its participation in the ESCB.

Membership in the EU subjects Portugal to compliance with European legislation which may either be in the
form of regulations, which are directly enforceable in any member state, or directives addressed to the
member states, which may require the enactment of implementing legislation or which, as established by the
European Court of Justice in several decisions, may be deemed to be directly enforceable in a member state
in the event that they are clear, precise and unconditional. In addition, the European Commission and the
Council of Ministers issue non-binding recommendations to member states. The Portuguese authorities have
introduced EU directives and recommendations into legislation to adapt Portuguese laws to European
regulatory standards.

Capital Adequacy Requirements

Capital and Solvency Ratios
Portuguese credit institutions are subject to solvency ratio requirements. These requirements conform to the
EU legal framework establishing common standards for the measurement of capital and a system for


                                                     253
weighting assets according to credit risk (as set forth in Directive 2006/49/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 14th June, 2006 on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions).
The solvency ratio is defined as Tier I capital plus Tier II capital divided by risk-weighted assets and the
minimum required ratio is currently 8 per cent. As at 30th June, 2010, the BES Group’s solvency ratio was
11.1 per cent. under the Basel II IRB Foundation method, with tier 1 ratio and core tier 1 ratio standing at
respectively 8.4 per cent. and 7.9 per cent.

Risk-weighted assets comprise a component reflecting credit risk, but also components that reflect
operational and market risk. Under the current legal framework, credit institutions may calculate the risk-
weighting of their assets, insofar as credit risk is concerned, according to a standards-based approach or
based on their own internal risk_management models, in the latter case subject to authorisation by the Bank
of Portugal.

Market risk is defined as the risk of losses in on-and off-balance-sheet positions arising from movements in
market prices. Market risk also includes the risks pertaining to interest rate-related instruments and equities
in the trading book and foreign exchange risk and commodities risk throughout the BES Group.

Operational risk is defined as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people
and systems or from external events. This definition includes legal risk, but excludes strategic and
reputational risk.

In November 2008, the BES Group submitted a formal application to the Bank of Portugal to apply the
Internal Ratings Based Approach (IRB Approach) to calculate regulatory capital requirements for credit
risks, and the standardised approach – TSA method to calculate regulatory capital requirements for
operational risks. On 30th April, 2009, the Bank was authorised by the Bank of Portugal to use the IRB
approach and the standardised approach – TSA method to calculate minimum capital requirements to cover
credit risk and operational risk respectively, in effect as of 31st March, 2009. The approval of the IRB
Approach implies the utilisation of internal estimates of default probabilities as well as estimates of loss
given defaults and conversion factors for the retails segments (IRB Advanced). For the remaining segments
the same authorisation allows the utilisation of internal estimates for default probabilities (IRB Foundation).

The conclusion of the approval process placed BES Group in a leadership position in Portugal in terms of
risk management and in line with international best practices. BES is currently the only Portuguese bank
certified to use the IRB approach to calculate minimum capital requirements to cover credit risk.

As at 30th June, 2010, BES had total risk-weighted assets of €67.469 million as per the IRB method Basel
II methodology The distribution of the total risk-weighted assets by risk type was the following: credit risk
€59.394 million, market risk €4.407 million, operational risk €3.668 million.

Capital may be composed of (i) Tier I instruments, a concept which comprises the realised share capital,
share issue premiums, legal reserves and any other reserves constituted by undistributed profits, retained
earnings from past fiscal periods and earnings from the ongoing fiscal period and provisions for general
banking risks and (ii) Tier II instruments, a concept which comprises subordinated loans, loan loss reserves
up to 1.25 per cent. of risk-weighted assets calculated under the standard ratings based approach, revaluation
reserves and other types of less permanent forms of capital. Tier II capital is limited to 100 per cent. of Tier
I capital. Currently, the requirement is for firms to maintain 8 per cent. of risk-weighted assets, with each
institution choosing the composition of its capital between Tier I and Tier II within the prescribed limits.

Law 63-A/2008, of 24th November, 2008, grants the power to the Portuguese government to, by ministerial
order, define the level of own funds of credit institutions and it is expected that the minimum level of Tier I
capital will be fixed at 8 per cent. before the end of 2009. In November 2008, the Bank of Portugal issued
an order recommending credit institutions to maintain 8 per cent. of risk-weighted assets on a consolidated
basis starting on 30th September, 2009.
In the last quarter of 2008, the Bank of Portugal introduced changes to the method of calculation of Tier I
capital as part of a number of measures to counter the economic cycle. On 14th October, 2008, the Bank of
Portugal determined that unrealised gains or losses that do not result from impairment of debt securities,
loans or other accounts receivable held as available-for-sale cannot be taken into account for purposes of


                                                      254
calculating regulatory capital. On 28th October, 2008, the Bank of Portugal eliminated the previous 10 per
cent. of regulatory capital limit that could be represented by deferred taxes, thereby allowing that deferred
taxes be recognised in whole as regulatory capital. On 23th December, 2008, the Bank of Portugal
established that credit institutions may defer the recognition of the impact that any actuarial negative
deviations of pension funds (losses) incurred during 2008 (excluding losses from the expected rate of return
from the assets in the fund) have on their regulatory capital over four years, where 0 per cent. of that loss
will be recognised in 2009, 25 per cent. in 2010, 50 per cent. in 2011, 75 per cent. in 2012 and 100 per cent.
from 31st December, 2012 onwards.
Credit institutions that fail to comply with these requirements are subject to various measures that may be
imposed by the Bank of Portugal, including possible restrictions on dividends and imposition of fines and
other sanctions on not only the institution but also on its directors and executive officers. The BES Group is
in compliance with the solvency ratio requirements.

Own Funds and Large Exposures
Credit institutions are required by Portuguese law to maintain an adequate level of own funds, which shall
be at least equal to the minimum share capital. The relevant criteria to determine the level of own funds is
determined by the Bank of Portugal.
Under Portuguese law, credit institutions may not incur exposure to a client or group of connected clients
exceeding 25 per cent. of own funds. This limit is reduced to 20 per cent. of own funds if the exposure is to
a company that is a parent undertaking or subsidiary of the credit institution, or to a group of connected
clients that includes a parent undertaking or subsidiary of the credit institution.
Institutions may also not incur large exposure (exposure to a client or group of connected clients with a value
equal to or exceeding 10 per cent. of its own funds) which in total exceeds 800 per cent. of its own funds.
As permitted by the Banking Consolidation Directive, the Bank of Portugal has exempted from this
requirement the exposure to certain assets, including assets constituting credits over central governments or
central banks to which a 0 per cent. risk weighting would be applicable under the relevant Bank of Portugal
regulation.
These exposure limits are not applicable in the event its parent undertaking, its subsidiaries or subsidiaries
of its parent undertaking are subject to the supervision of the Bank of Portugal on a consolidated basis and
have their registered office in Portugal.

Minimum Reserve Requirements
Credit institutions are required to maintain minimum reserves on deposit with national central banks,
calculated as a percentage of certain liabilities. The reserve requirements are set by the ECB and are
currently 2 per cent. of deposits and debt securities, excluding deposits with central banks and other
institutions subject to reserve requirements. Certain liabilities, notably deposits with agreed maturity over
two years, deposits redeemable at notice over two years, repos, and debt securities issued with an original
maturity over two years have a reserve requirement of 0 per cent. Deposits made with the central bank for
the purposes of maintaining reserve requirements earn interest at the rediscount rate at which the ECB lends
to the other European central banks. The failure of a bank to maintain adequate liquidity may result in (i) a
non-interest-bearing deposit with the ECB or the national central banks (of up to three times the amount of
the minimum reserves which the relevant institution fails to provide) or (ii) an additional payment of up to
double the ECB marginal lending rate or up to five percentage points above the ECB marginal lending rate,
applied to the amount of the minimum reserves which the relevant institution fails to provide.

Deposit Guarantee Fund
The Deposit Guarantee Fund was established in December 1994 and has administrative and financial
autonomy. Credit institutions with head offices in Portugal that accept deposits must participate in this fund.
The financial resources of the Deposit Guarantee Fund are mainly composed of initial contributions from the
Bank of Portugal and participating credit institutions and, thereafter, periodic contributions from the
participating credit institutions.




                                                     255
The annual contributions are defined according to the monthly average of the deposits balance accepted in
the previous year and to the fixed contribution rate, weighted by the average solvency ratio of each institution
in the previous year (the lower an institution’s ratio, the higher its contribution). The annual contributions
rate is determined annually by the Bank of Portugal up to a limit of 0.2 per cent. and was set at 0.03 per cent.
for 2010.

The Bank of Portugal may determine that the payment of up to 75 per cent. of the annual contributions may
be partly replaced by an irrevocable undertaking, guaranteed by a pledge of securities having a low credit
risk and high liquidity. The Bank of Portugal determined that this limit would be 10 per cent. for the 2010
annual contribution. If the resources are insufficient to comply with its commitments, the Deposit Guarantee
Fund may ask for additional contributions or resort to loans.

When a credit institution is unable to comply with its commitments, the Deposit Guarantee Fund guarantees
the repayment to depositors of up to €100,000 per depositor. Decree Law 211-A/2008 of 3rd November,
2008 increased this limit from €25,000 until 31st December, 2011.

The deposits made on Portuguese territory are guaranteed regardless of the currency in which they are
denominated, and whether the depositor is resident or non-resident in Portugal. However, some deposits are
excluded from the guarantee scheme, such as those made by credit institutions, financial companies,
insurance companies, investment funds, pension funds and central or local administration bodies in their own
name and for their own account. Moreover, in order to prevent a conflict of interests, the Deposit Guarantee
Fund does not guarantee deposits made by an institution’s managing bodies, qualifying shareholders,
external auditors and companies under a group or control relationship with the credit institution.

The Deposit Guarantee Fund is not obliged to participate in any procedures regarding the reorganisation and
recovery of the participating credit institutions.

Borrowing from the Bank of Portugal
The Bank of Portugal has followed a policy of intervening as a lender of last resort in cases of liquidity
shortfalls in the banking system. The basic method of lending employed takes the form of advances and
overdrafts against collateral. For this purpose, the Bank of Portugal discloses a list of securities eligible as
collateral. The rediscount rate is now set by the ECB.

International Capital Flows
The Portuguese authorities have established a programme of liberalisation of international capital flows in
furtherance of the country’s integration into the single market of the European Union.

Investment in Non-financial Companies
According to the Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies, credit institutions may
not have any direct or indirect qualified holding exceeding 15 per cent. of the companies’ own funds. In
addition, the total amount of qualified holdings held by a credit institution in such non-financial companies
may not exceed 60 per cent. of its own funds.

The Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies also provides that no credit institution
may directly or indirectly own more than 25 per cent. of voting rights in any non-financial company for a
period longer than three years (five years for shareholdings held indirectly through venture capital and
holding companies). These limitations are not applicable, notably, to auxiliary services companies. BES is
currently in compliance with these provisions.

Conduct supervision
The Bank of Portugal has supervisory powers relating to the conduct of credit institutions. These powers are
supported by fiscal, decision and sanction powers relating to the rules on the conduct of business, client
relationships, professional secrecy, conflicts of interest and competition, to which credit institutions are
subject. The conduct supervision rules on client relationships consist of information obligations, rules
relating to the management of client complaints, a requirement to adopt a code of conduct and rules relating
to the publicity of credit institutions.


                                                      256
Granting credit to members of the corporate bodies
In general, credit institutions are not authorised to grant credit, in any way, including by providing
guarantees, to the members of their board of directors or audit board, or to companies or other legal entities
directly or indirectly controlled by them.

This limitation does not apply to: (i) operations with a social nature or purpose or those deriving from
personnel policy; (ii) credit granted as a result of the use of credit cards associated with deposit accounts, in
conditions similar to the ones applicable to other clients with a similar profile and risk; (iii) members of the
general supervisory board (“Conselho Geral e de Supervisãol”) who are not part of the financial committee,
non-executive directors of credit institutions who are not part of the audit committee, or companies or other
legal entities controlled by them; or (iv) the credit granting operations of certain entities subject to the
supervision on a consolidated basis of the relevant credit institution.

The members of the board of directors or audit board of a credit institution cannot participate in the analysis
and decision making process relating to operations where they may have a conflict of interest.

Breach of rules under the Bank of Portugal’s supervision
Breaches of rules under the Bank of Portugal supervision constitute misdemeanours and may result in the
Bank of Portugal’s imposing fines of up to €5,000,000. Ancillary sanctions may also be imposed, such as,
amongst others, the apprehension of the proceeds obtained through the offence, the publication of the final
sanction, the prohibition of exercising management functions in credit institutions and the suspension of
voting rights of the shareholders of credit institutions.

Other Controls
The Bank of Portugal imposes a number of other controls covering various aspects of a bank’s business. It
administers these controls through reporting requirements and ongoing supervision, including periodic
examinations of the operations and asset portfolios of individual banks and consolidated banking groups.

Securities Market Supervision
The regulation and supervision of the securities markets and financial intermediation activities in Portugal
are carried out by the central government, acting through the Ministry of Finance and the CMVM.

The Ministry of Finance may establish policies relating to markets in financial instruments, investor
protection, financial intermediation activities and generally any matters regulated by the Portuguese
Securities Code. The Ministry of Finance also oversees the CMVM and co-ordinates the supervision and
regulation relating to financial instruments when powers have been delegated to more than one public entity.
When a disturbance in the markets in financial instruments puts the national economy at serious risk, the
Ministry of Finance may, by means of a joint Ministerial Order by the Prime Minister and the Minister of
Finance, impose necessary measures. These may include the temporary suspension of (i) the regulated
markets and certain categories of transactions or activities of their management entities; (ii) multilateral
trading facilities; (iii) settlement systems; (iv) clearing houses or central counterparties; and (v) central
securities depositaries.

The CMVM is the regulatory agency in charge of the supervision and regulation of the securities markets
and financial intermediation services. It is an administrative agency overseen by the Ministry of Finance.

In particular, the responsibilities of the CMVM include the supervision of certain conduct of business rules
relating to financial intermediation activities and markets in financial instruments and the prudential
supervision of certain entities.

For this purpose, the CMVM may issue regulations on matters within the scope of its supervision powers,
including conduct of business rules for providers of investment services, the recognition of markets for
financial instruments, the establishment of rules for the operation of such markets, as well as rules on public
offers and prospectus requirements.




                                                      257
The CMVM may, within the course of its supervision activities, carry out inspections, issue information
requests, conduct hearings, require the collaboration of other persons or entities, including police authorities,
disclose information, including in substitution of supervised entities, conduct investigations and organise a
registration system, carry out enforcement actions and impose administrative sanctions.

BES is subject to the CMVM’s supervision both as a financial intermediary and an issuer of securities
admitted to trading on a regulated market.

Supervisory Rules Applicable to BES as a Financial Intermediary
BES and some of its Portuguese subsidiaries, the main ones being BESI and ESAF, are authorised as
financial intermediaries. They are subject to the supervision of the CMVM in relation to their performance
of financial intermediation activities.

The conduct of business rules applicable to financial intermediaries are laid out in the Portuguese Securities
Code, CMVM regulations and legislation applicable to specific financial intermediation activities. The
Portuguese Securities Code has been subject to several amendments in the past years, most of them triggered
by the implementation of European Union directives.

Conduct of Business Rules

For the development of regulated activities, financial intermediaries such as BES must comply with conduct
of business rules set out in the Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies and the
Portuguese Securities Code as well as those which may be established by CMVM regulation or special
legislation.

As a general principle, financial intermediaries must conduct their activity in a manner which protects the
legal interests of their clients and the efficiency of the market. In their dealings with other market parties,
financial intermediaries must observe the dictates of good faith, in accordance with high standards of
diligence, loyalty and transparency.

The main conduct of business rules applicable to financial intermediaries carrying out financial
intermediation activities relate to: (i) “know your client” obligations, including the obligation to conduct
tests on the suitability and adequacy of the services or products for each client; (ii) the financial
intermediaries’ human, material and technical resources; (iii) complaint procedures; (iv) segregation of
clients’ assets; (v) record keeping and reporting; (vi) conflicts of interest policy; and (vii) information-
retention obligations.

Supervisory Rules Applicable to BES as an Issuer of Shares Admitted to Trading in a Regulated Market
A company whose shares are admitted to trading on a regulated market must, in addition to all the disclosure
rules established in the Portuguese Companies Code, disclose to the CMVM and the public on its own
website information regarding its organisation, the main aspects of its activity and how its business is
conducted.

The main rules concern: (i) the obligation to disclose to the CMVM and the public on its own website all
notices received regarding qualified holdings by third parties in the company’s share capital and the relevant
annual, semi-annual and quarterly financial and management information; (ii) specific procedures for postal
votes and proxies for the exercise of voting rights in the company’s general shareholders’ meetings; (iii)
disclosure of privileged information; and (iv) the obligation of the company’s directors and other senior
executives to disclose any transactions undertaken by them in relation to the company’s shares.

CMVM’s Powers
As stated above, the CMVM supervises the activities and participants in the financial markets in Portugal.
The CMVM has the power to introduce binding regulations, take appropriate enforcement measures to
sanction breaches of these regulations and of the Portuguese Securities Code, and to sanction such breaches.




                                                      258
When exercising its powers, the CMVM has the right, among others, to request non-public information,
including information otherwise subject to professional confidentiality obligations, hold hearings, undertake
investigations and summon people to co-operate with such investigations, and take the place of supervised
entities to provide information to the market.

The CMVM also operates an information disclosure system which can be used by parties subject to
disclosure rules as a cost effective and efficient means of complying with information rules.

Breach of Rules under the CMVM’s Supervision
A breach of the rules laid down in the Portuguese Securities Code may constitute a crime or misdemeanour.

Crimes: Market manipulation and the abuse of privileged information are punishable with prison sentences
of up to five years and with ancillary administrative sanctions that include the interdiction from exercising
any intermediation activity, interdiction from participating in the management of a publicly-traded company
or financial intermediary, the publication of the notice of the crime and the apprehension of any proceeds of
the illegal activity.

Misdemeanours: Different levels of misdemeanour are punishable by different penalties. Very serious
misdemeanours, such as the disclosure of untrue or misleading information to the market or undertaking an
offer without the disclosure of an approved prospectus, are punishable by a fine of up to €5,000. Serious
misdemeanours, such as the failure to disclose publicly-traded companies’ shareholders agreements or the
breach of the obligation to launch a mandatory public offer, are punishable by fines of up to €2,500,000 and
less serious misdemeanours are punishable by fines of up to €500,000.

Portuguese Insurance Institute
BES is also subject to the supervision of the Portuguese Insurance Institute insofar as it is a tied insurance
mediator.

Evolution of the Regulatory Environment
As part of the EU’s internal market programme, the European Commission and the European Council have
proposed and adopted a number of regulations, directives and recommendations relating to the provision of
banking and financial services. These include existing and proposed legislation concerning capital
movements, depositors’ guarantees, payment systems, collective investment companies, investment firms,
public disclosure of acquisitions and dispositions of holdings in listed companies, prospectuses for the public
issuance of securities, shareholders’ rights, consumer credit, insider trading, mortgage credit, insurance,
publication of annual accounting documents and taxation. Such legislation promotes greater competition in
the provision of financial services, including areas in which BES operates, such as securities brokerage,
dealing and underwriting, and the provision of investment advice.

12.    Shareholders’ Structure
The main shareholders as of 30th June, 2010 were as follows:                                                      A11.10.1


Shareholder                                                                                  % Share Capital
Bespar, SGPS, SA                                                                                      40.19
Credit Agricole, SA                                                                                   10.81
Bradport, SGPS, S.A.                                                                                   6.05
Slichester International Investors Limited
Grupo Portugal Telecom, SGPS, SA(a)                                                                       2.64
(a) Through Pension Funds of various companies of PT Group




                                                         259
The following table sets out the main shareholders of BES as calculated pursuant to Article 20 of the
Portuguese Securities Code as of 30th June, 2010:
                                                                             Number Percentage of
                                                                       of shares held    voting rights
Qualified Shareholders
BESPAR – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
  directly                                                               466,666,666          40.00%
  through members of its Board of Directors and Supervisory Bodies         2,266,687           0.19%
                                                                         —————           —————
Total                                                                    468,933,353          40.19%
Crédit Agricole S.A. (France)
                                                                              ————— —————
 directly                                                                     126,076 650        10.81%
                                                                              —————            —————
Total                                                                         126,076,650        10.81%

Bradport, SGPS, S.A.
                                                                              ————— —————
 (Portuguese company fully owned by Banco Bradesco)
 directly                                                                      70,583,333        6.05%
                                                                              —————            —————
Total                                                                          70,583,333        6.05%

Portugal Telecom, SGPS, S.A.
                                                                              ————— —————
 through the Pension Funds of PT Group companies
 managed by PREVISÃO-Sociedade
 Gestora de Fundos de Pensões, S.A.                                            30,585,108        2.62%
 through members of its Board of Directors and Supervisory Bodies                 188,263        0.02%
                                                                              —————            —————
Total                                                                          30,773,371        2.64%
Slichester International Investors Limited (United Kingdom)
                                                                              ————— —————
  directly                                                                     35,103,934        3.01%
                                                                              —————            —————
Total                                                                          35,103,934        3.01%
Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (Luxembourg)
                                                                              ————— —————
 directly                                                                      23,434,904            2.01%
 through BESPAR, SGPS S.A. (controlled by Espírito
 Santo Financial Group (Portugal), SGPS, S.A, fully owned
 by Espirito Santo Financial Group S.A.)                                      468,933,353           40.19%
 through members of its Board of Directors and Supervisory Bodies                  71,159            0.01%
 through companies controlled by it directly or indirectly and/or
 members of its Board of Directors and Supervisory Bodies                       8,978,166         0.77%
                                                                              —————            —————
Total                                                                         501,417,582        42.98%
Espírito Santo International S.A. (Luxembourg)
                                                                              ————— —————
 through Espírito Santo Financial Group, S.A                                  501,417,582           42.98%
 through companies controlled directly and indirectly and/or
 members of its Board of Directors and Supervisory Bodies                          75,466         0.01%
                                                                              —————            —————
Total                                                                         501,493,048        42.99%
                                                                              ————— —————
All of the ordinary shares held by the shareholders of BES have the same voting rights. According to the
Articles of Association of BES, shareholders are entitled to one vote for every 100 ordinary shares held,
although shareholders who own less than 100 shares may pool their shares.
BES is unaware of any arrangements, as of the date hereof, the operation of which may at a subsequent date
result in a change of control of BES.
With the goal of ensuring BES’s independence from its shareholders and reducing the possibility that any
eventual abusive exercise of control over BES by its shareholders, BES has adopted relevant measures
including, among others, full transparency in its relations with its shareholders and strict compliance with
the legal provisions namely concerning transactions with related parties and conflicts of interest.


                                                    260
                                                                                                                   A5.4.14
                                              TAXATION

Taxation in the Cayman Islands                                                                                     A12.4.1.14

Prospective investors should consult their professional advisers on the possible tax consequences of buying,
holding or selling any Note under the laws of their country of citizenship, residence or domicile.

Cayman Islands Taxation
The following is a discussion on certain Cayman Islands tax consequences of an investment in the Notes.
The discussion is a general summary of present law, which is subject to prospective and retroactive change.
It is not intended as tax advice, does not consider any investor’s particular circumstances, and does not
consider tax consequences other than those arising under Cayman Islands law.

Under existing Cayman Islands Laws:
–     Payments of interest and principal on the Notes will not be subject to taxation in the Cayman Islands
      and no withholding will be required on the payment of interest and principal to any holder of the
      Notes, nor will gains derived from the disposal of the Notes be subject to Cayman Islands income or
      corporation tax;

–     The Cayman Islands currently have no income, corporation or capital gains tax and no estate duty,
      inheritance tax or gift tax;

–     No stamp duty is payable in respect of the issue or transfer of the Notes although duty may be payable
      if Notes are executed in or brought into the Cayman Islands; and

–     Certificates evidencing the Notes, in registered form, to which title is not transferable by delivery,
      should not attract Cayman Islands stamp duty. However, any instrument transferring title to any Note,
      in registered form, if brought to or executed in the Cayman Islands, would be subject to Cayman
      Islands stamp duty.

Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. was registered under the Companies Law of the Cayman Islands as a foreign
company incorporated in Lisbon, Portugal on 20th October, 1937, which registration was given on
22nd February, 2000. Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. holds a category “B” Banking Licence issued on
15th March, 2000 under The Banks and Trust Companies Law (1995 Revision) of the Cayman Islands. BES
Finance has obtained an undertaking from the Governor in Council of the Cayman Islands pursuant to the
Tax Concessions Law (1995 Revision) of the Cayman Islands that, for a period of 20 years from 14th
January, 1997, no law enacted in the Cayman Islands imposing any tax to be levied on profits, income gains
or appreciations shall apply to BES Finance or its operations and no such tax or any tax in the nature of estate
duty or inheritance tax shall be payable by BES Finance on or in respect of the shares, debentures, or other
obligations of BES Finance or by way of withholding in whole or in part of any payment of dividend or other
distribution of income or capital by BES Finance to its members or any payment of interest or principal or
other sums due under a debenture or other obligation of BES Finance.

Taxation in Portugal (including Madeira)
The following is a summary of the material Portuguese tax consequences with respect to the Notes. The
summary does not purport to be a comprehensive description of all the tax consequences that may be
relevant to any particular Noteholder, including tax considerations that arise from rules of general
application or that are generally assumed to be known to Noteholders. This discussion is based on
Portuguese law as it stands at the date of this Prospectus and is subject to any change in law that may
take effect after such date. Prospective investors in the Notes should consult their professional advisers
with respect to particular circumstances and the effects of state, local or foreign laws to which they
may be subject. Noteholders who are in doubt as to their tax position should consult their professional
advisers.




                                                      261
Economic benefits derived from interest, amortisation, reimbursement premiums and other types of
remuneration arising from the Notes are designated as investment income for Portuguese tax purposes.

Notes issued by Bank acting through Cayman Islands or London branches are subject to the following
specific tax considerations:
Payments to be made by the Bank acting through Cayman Islands or London branches of investment income
(including interest) arising from Notes issued by them and payable to an individual or legal person who is a
non-resident in Portuguese territory for tax purposes are not subject to Portuguese withholding tax provided
those payments correspond to costs or charges concerning the activities of that branch. It should be taken
into account that according with the legal provision dealing with this matter the Secretary of State for Fiscal
Affairs (currently Secretàrio de Estado dos Assuntos Fiscais) has issued the governmental order no.
1132/2006-XVII, of 12th September, which has only entered into force in respect of Notes issued after 1st
January, 2007, stating that, if the proceeds of the Notes issued by foreign financial branches of Portuguese
credit institutions are transferred to the respective headquarters or to another branch of such Portuguese
credit institutions, the investment income (including interest) arising from such Notes and payable to
Noteholders with no residence, effective management or permanent establishment in Portugal will be
considered subject to a Portuguese final withholding tax at a rate of 20 per cent., in the case of non-resident
legal persons, or at a rate of 21.5 per cent. in the case of non-resident individuals which may be reduced in
accordance with any applicable double taxation treaty signed by Portugal. In order to benefit from such
reduction Noteholders shall comply with certain procedures and certification requirements of the Portuguese
tax authorities, aimed at verifying the non-resident status and eligibility for the respective tax treaty benefits
(currently the form 21 RFI).

Notes issued by the Bank acting through its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch are subject to the
following specific tax considerations:
The Madeira Free Trade Zone is a Free Trade Zone, established as part of the taxation system in the
Portuguese Republic. Investment income paid by the Bank through its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch
benefits from a tax exemption provided that the Bank acting through its Madeira Free Trade Zone is
financing its balance sheet liabilities and the Noteholders and Couponholders, as beneficiaries of the income,
are individuals or corporate entities resident, or with registered offices, outside, and without permanent
establishments located in, the Portuguese Republic (with the exception of the Madeira Free Trade Zone or
the Free Trade Zone of the Island of Santa Maria). This exemption is not applicable when the beneficiaries
of the income are credit or financial institutions or financial branches located in the Madeira Free Trade Zone
or the Free Trade Zone of the Island of Santa Maria, which carry out their activity with residents in the
Portuguese Republic’s mainland or with permanent establishments of non resident entities therein.

Therefore, under current Portuguese law, investment income on the Notes paid by the Bank acting through
its Madeira Free Trade Zone Branch is exempt from taxation and consequently from withholding tax where
the beneficiaries of the income are:

(i)    individuals or entities operating within the Madeira Free Trade Zone which are not credit institutions
       or financial companies or financial branches which carry out operations in the scope of their activities
       with residents in mainland Portuguese Republic or with permanent establishments of non-resident
       entities in mainland Portuguese Republic; or

(ii)   individuals not resident for tax purposes in the Portuguese Republic pursuant to section 16 of the
       Income Tax Code (“Código do Imposto sobre o Rendimento de Pessoas Singulares”) or incorporated
       entities with registered offices outside the Portuguese Republic and without permanent establishments
       located in the Portuguese Republic, or other incorporated entities whose registered office or effective
       management is not located in the Portuguese Republic.

       It should be noted that permanent establishments in the Portuguese Republic of incorporated entities
       with registered offices outside the Portuguese Republic and companies and other incorporated entities
       with a registered office or effective management located in the Portuguese Republic, are considered
       residents in the Portuguese Republic and therefore do not benefit from tax exemption contained in
       section 33.6 of the Tax Benefits Statute (approved by Decree-Law 215/89, of 1989, as amended).



                                                      262
        Under domestic law, a permanent establishment is defined as a fixed installation through which an
        activity (other than an activity of a preparatory or auxiliary character) of a commercial, industrial or
        agricultural nature is carried on. A permanent establishment is also deemed to exist when a person
        other than an independent agent acts within the territory of Portugal on behalf of a foreign enterprise
        and has, and habitually exercises, the authority to negotiate and conclude contracts related to the
        activities of the enterprise. In this situation a permanent establishment is not deemed to exist if a
        company operates in Portugal through a commission agent, or any other type of independent agent,
        provided that such persons are acting in the ordinary course of their business and bear the risk of the
        activity.

The aforementioned tax exemption, and the consequent withholding tax exemption, will apply to the
specified category of Noteholders and/or Couponholders, as the case may be, so long as they are able to
provide to the Issuer (i) the Residency Information (as defined below); and (ii) a statement of non-Portuguese
beneficial ownership substantially as set out in Annex 1 to this “Taxation” section (the “Statement of non-
Portuguese Beneficial Ownership”) prior to the Income Payment Date.

“Residency Information” means appropriate evidence that the relevant Noteholder and/or Couponholder, as
the case may be, is not resident in the Portuguese Republic and does not have any registered or deemed
permanent establishment in the Portuguese Republic in accordance with the following provisions as set forth
in article 33.14 of the Tax Benefit Statute (Estatuto dos Beneficios Fiscais), as amended from time to time,
applicable to the residency certification of payees of interest that are exempt from Portuguese withholding
taxation:

(i)     if a Noteholder or Couponholder, as the case may be, is a central bank, public institution, international
        body, credit institution, financial company, securities or real estate investment fund, pension fund or
        insurance company with its head office in any OECD country or in a country with which the
        Portuguese Republic has entered into a double taxation treaty and is subject to a special supervision
        regime or administrative registration, certification shall be made by means of the following: (A) its
        tax identification; or (B) a certificate issued by the entity responsible for such supervision or
        registration confirming the legal existence of the Noteholder and Couponholder and their head office;
        or (C) a declaration of tax residence issued by the Noteholder and/or Couponholder itself, duly signed
        and authenticated, if a central bank, public law entity taking part of the public administration (either
        central, regional or peripheral, indirect or autonomous of the country of the relevant Noteholder
        and/or Couponholder) or an international body; or (D) proof of non-residence, pursuant to the terms
        of paragraph (iii) below, so long as the Noteholder and/or Couponholder provides a form of
        confirmation referred to in said paragraph (iii);

(ii)    if a Noteholder and/or Couponholder, as the case may be, is a working emigrant it must prove its
        status by way of the documents approved by decision (despacho) of the Minister of Finance regulating
        the emigrant savings system;

(iii)   in any other case, information provided in accordance with the following rules: confirmation must be
        made by the relevant Noteholder and/or Couponholder, as the case may be, by way of (A) a certificate
        of residence or equivalent document issued by the relevant tax authorities, (B) a document issued by
        the relevant Portuguese Consulate certifying residence abroad, or (C) a document specifically issued
        by an official entity taking part in the public administration (either central, regional or peripheral,
        indirect or autonomous) of the relevant country. For these purposes, an identification document such
        as a passport or an identification card (bilhete de identidade) or document by means of which it is
        indirectly possible to presume the relevant tax residence (such as a work or permanent residency
        permit) are not acceptable.

        There are specific rules relating to the originality and validity of the document, notably that the
        Noteholder and/or Couponholder must provide an original or a certified copy of the residency
        certificate or document and, as a rule, (i) if such document does not refer to a specific residency year
        and has not expired, it must have been issued within the three year period prior to the relevant payment
        date or the relevant Maturity Date; or (ii) such document must have been issued in the year of the



                                                       263
       relevant payment date or the relevant Maturity Date and refer to the residency status in that year or in
       the previous one.

“Tax Identification” means a document provided by the relevant tax authority which evidences the status of
the Noteholder and/or Couponholder, as the case may be, as a tax payer in the applicable jurisdiction, which
may be a copy of a pre-existing tax identification or other document with similar effect.

Notes issued by the Bank acting through its head office in Lisbon are subject to the following specific
tax considerations:

General tax regime applicable to debt securities
Investment income on the Notes paid to a holder of Notes (who is the effective beneficiary thereof (the
“Beneficiary”)) considered to be resident for tax purposes in the Portuguese territory or to a non-Portuguese
resident having a permanent establishment in the Portuguese territory to which income is imputable, is
subject to withholding tax at a rate of 21.5 per cent., except where the Beneficiary is either a Portuguese
resident financial institution (or a non-resident financial institution having a permanent establishment in the
Portuguese territory to which income is imputable) or benefits from a reduction or a withholding tax
exemption as specified by current Portuguese tax law. In relation to Beneficiaries that are corporate entities
resident in the Portuguese territory (or non-residents having a permanent establishment therein to which
income is imputable), withholding tax is treated as a payment in advance and, therefore, such Beneficiaries
are entitled to claim appropriate credit against their final corporate income tax liability. In relation to
Beneficiaries that are individuals resident in the Portuguese territory, withholding tax rate of 21.5 per cent.
shall be considered as final, unless the individual elects to include it in his taxable income, subject to tax at
progressive rates of up to 45.88 per cent. In this case, the tax withheld is deemed to be a payment on account
of the final tax due.

Investment income on the Notes paid to Beneficiaries considered as non-residents in the Portuguese territory
(and having no permanent establishment therein to which income is imputable) is also subject to withholding
tax at a flat rate of 20 per cent. in the case of non-resident legal persons, or at a rate of 21.5 per cent., in the
case of non-resident individuals. This withholding tax rate may be reduced in accordance with any applicable
double taxation treaty signed by Portugal, subject to compliance with certain procedures and certification
requirements of the Portuguese tax authorities, aimed at verifying the non-resident status and eligibility for
the respective tax treaty benefits.

Special debt securities tax regime
Pursuant to Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November, 2005 (“Decree-Law 193/2005”), as amended from time
to time, investment income paid to Noteholders in respect of debt securities registered with a clearing system
recognised by the Portuguese Securities’ Code, as well as capital gains derived from a sale or other
disposition of such Notes, will be exempt from Portuguese income tax, provided the following requirements
are met.

Regarding the investment income derived on the Notes, for the withholding tax exemption to apply, Decree-
Law 193/2005 requires that the Noteholders are: (i) neither residents in the Portuguese territory (or having
any registered or deemed permanent establishment therein to which interest is imputable); (ii) nor residents
in the countries and territories included in the Portuguese “blacklist” (countries and territories currently
listed in Portaria 150/2004, of 13th February, 2004), with the exception of central banks and governmental
agencies of those blacklisted jurisdictions and (iii) in the case of being legal entities, provided that not more
than 20 per cent. of its share capital is held, whether directly or indirectly, by Portuguese residents.

Regarding capital gains, such exemption will apply provided that: (i) those gains are realised by non-
Portuguese resident entities having no permanent establishment located in the Portuguese territory to which
such gains are imputable; (ii) the non-resident entities are not residents in the countries and territories
included in the Portuguese “blacklist” (those countries and territories listed in Portaria 150/2004, of
13th February, 2004); (iii) in the case of legal entities, such non-residents are not held, directly or indirectly,
more than 25 per cent. by Portuguese residents, as required by Article 27° of the Portuguese Tax Benefits
Statute.



                                                       264
For purposes of application at source of this tax exemption regime, Decree-Law 193/2005 requires
completion of certain procedures and certifications. Under these procedures (which are aimed at verifying
the non-resident status of the Noteholder), the Noteholder is required to hold the Notes through an account
with one of the following entities: (i) a direct register entity, which is an entity affiliated with the clearing
system recognised by the Portuguese Securities’ Code; (ii) an indirect register entity, which, although not
assuming the role of the “direct register entities”, is a client of the latter; or (iii) entities managing an
international clearing system, which are entities operating with the international market to clear and settle
securities’ transactions. For the purposes of the exemption granted under Decree-Law 193/2005, the
Portuguese Government has recognised each of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg as entities
managing an international clearing system.

The following is a general description of the rules and procedures for the proof required for the exemption
to apply at source, as they stand as at the date of this Prospectus.

1.      Domestic Cleared Notes – held through a direct register entity
Direct register entities are required, for the purposes of Decree-Law 193/2005, to register the Noteholders in
one of two accounts: (i) an exempt account or (ii) a non-exempt account.

Registration of the Notes in the exempt account is crucial for the exemption to apply. For this purpose, the
registration of the non-resident Noteholders in an exempt account, allowing application of the exemption
upfront, requires evidence of the non-resident status, to be provided by the Noteholder to the direct register
entity before or at the Income Payment Date (as defined below), as follows:

(i)     if the Noteholder is a central bank, public institution, international body, credit or financial institution,
        a pension fund or an insurance company, with its head office in any OECD country or in a country
        with which the Portuguese Republic has entered into a double tax treaty, the Noteholder will be
        required to prove its non-resident status by providing: (a) its tax identification; or (b) a certificate
        issued by the entity responsible for its supervision or registration, confirming the legal existence of
        the Noteholder and its head office; or (c) a declaration of tax residence issued by the Noteholder itself,
        duly signed and authenticated, if the Noteholder is a central bank, a public law entity taking part in
        the public administration (either central, regional or peripheral, indirect or autonomous of the relevant
        country), or an international body; or (d) proof of non- residence pursuant to the terms of paragraph
        (iii) below. When the Notes are held by central banks or governmental agencies, the respective proof
        of non-residence in Portuguese territory is provided only once, without need for periodical renewal;

(ii)    if the Noteholder is an investment fund or other collective investment scheme domiciled in any OECD
        country or in a country with which the Portuguese Republic has entered into a double tax treaty, it
        shall make proof of its non-resident status by providing any of the following documents: (a) a
        declaration issued by the entity responsible for its supervision or registration or by the relevant tax
        authority, confirming its legal existence, domicile and law of incorporation; or (b) proof of non-
        residence pursuant to the terms of paragraph (iii) below;

(iii)   other investors will be required to make proof of their non-resident status by way of: (a) a certificate
        of residence or equivalent document issued by the relevant tax authorities; (b) a document issued by
        the relevant Portuguese Consulate certifying residence abroad; or (c) a document specifically issued
        by an official entity which forms part of the public administration (either central, regional or
        peripheral, indirect or autonomous) of the relevant country. The Noteholder must provide an original
        or a certified copy of such documents and, as a rule, if such documents do not refer to a specific year
        and do not expire, they must have been issued within the three years prior to the relevant payment or
        maturity dates or, if issued after the relevant payment or maturity dates, within the following three
        months. The Beneficiary must inform the direct registering entity immediately of any change in the
        requirement conditions that may eliminate the tax exemption.

“Income Payment Date” means any date on which the Noteholders are entitled to receive interest or other
investment income, either in the form of accrued interest or coupon.




                                                        265
2.     Internationally Cleared Notes – held through an entity managing an international clearing
       system
If the Notes are registered in an account with an international clearing system (either with Euroclear or
Clearstream, Luxembourg) and the management entity of such international clearing system undertakes not
to provide registration services in respect of the Notes to (i) Portuguese tax residents that do not benefit from
either an exemption or waiver of Portuguese withholding tax, and (ii) to non-resident entities for tax purposes
which do not benefit from the above Portuguese income tax exemption, the proof required to benefit from
the exemption will be made before or at the Income Payment Date as follows:
(i)    through the presentation of a certificate, on a yearly basis, with the name of each beneficial owner,
       address, tax payer number (if applicable), the identity of the securities, the quantity held and also the
       reference to the legislation supporting the exemption or the waiver of Portuguese withholding tax. The
       form of the notice is set out in Annex 2 to this “Taxation” section (which corresponds to the wording
       and contents of the form of certificate for exemption from Portuguese withholding tax on income from
       debt securities, as contained in Order (Despacho) n° 4980/2006, published in the Portuguese official
       diary, second series, n° 45, of 3rd March 2006, issued by the Portuguese Minister of Finance and
       Public Administration (currently, Ministro das Finanças e da Administração Pública)); or
(ii)   alternatively, through a yearly declaration that states that the beneficial owners are exempt or not
       subject to withholding tax. This declaration is complemented with a disclosure list, on each coupon
       payment date, of each beneficial owner’s identification, with the name of each beneficial owner,
       address, tax payer number (if applicable), the identity of the securities, the quantity held and also the
       reference to the legislation supporting the exemption or the waiver of Portuguese withholding tax. The
       form of the declaration is set out in Annex 3 to this “Taxation” section (which corresponds to the
       wording and contents of the form of statement for exemption from Portuguese withholding tax on
       income from debt securities, as contained in Regulatory Notice (Aviso) n° 3714/2006, published in
       the Portuguese official diary, second series, n° 59, of 23rd March, 2006, issued by the Portuguese
       Secretary of State for Fiscal Affairs (currently, Secretário de Estado dos Assuntos Fiscais).
The two documents referred to in (i) or (ii) above, which are reproduced in Annexes 2 and 3, shall be
provided by the participants (i.e. the entities that operate in the international clearing system) to the direct
registering entities, through the international clearing system managing entity, and must take into account the
total accounts under their management relating to each Noteholder that is tax exempt or benefits from the
waiver of Portuguese withholding tax.
The delivery of the documents referred to in (i) or (ii) above, which are reproduced in Annexes 2 and 3, by
the participants to the respective international clearing system managing entities shall follow the procedures
that are from time to time applicable for this purpose by said international clearing system managing entities.
The international clearing system managing entities shall inform the direct registering entity of the income
paid to each participant for each security payment.
No Portuguese withholding tax exemption shall be granted under Decree-Law 193/2005 if the requirements
set forth therein are not complied with and, consequently, the general Portuguese tax provisions shall apply
as described above. This will be the case whenever the Notes are not integrated in/ cleared through Interbolsa
or in any other centralised depositary system for securities recognized under the Portuguese Securities Code
and complementary legislation.
If the conditions for the exemption to apply are met but, due to inaccurate or insufficient information, tax
was withheld, a special refund procedure is available under the special regime approved by Decree-Law
193/2005. The refund claim is to be submitted to the direct or indirect register entity of the Notes within 90
days from the date the withholding took place. A special tax form for these purposes was approved by Order
(“Despacho”) n. 4980/2006 (2nd series), published in the Portuguese official gazette, second series, n. 45, of
3th March, 2006 issued by the Portuguese Minister of Finance and Public Administration and is available at
www.portaldasfinancas.gov.pt.
The refund of withholding tax in other circumstances or after the above 90 day period is to be claimed from
the Portuguese tax authorities under the general procedures and within the general deadlines.


                                                      266
Taxation in the United Kingdom
The following applies only to persons who are the beneficial owners of Notes and is a summary of the
Issuer’s understanding of current law and practice in the United Kingdom relating to the United
Kingdom withholding tax treatment of payments of principal and interest in respect of Notes. It does
not deal with any other United Kingdom taxation implications of acquiring, holding or disposing of
Notes. The United Kingdom tax treatment of prospective Noteholders depends on their individual
circumstances and may be subject to change in the future. Some aspects do not apply to certain classes
of person (such as dealers) to whom special rules may apply. Prospective Noteholders who are in any
doubt as to their tax position or who may be subject to tax in a jurisdiction other than the United
Kingdom should seek their own professional advice.

Payment of interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch
Provided that it continues to be a bank within the meaning of section 991 of the Income Tax Act 2007 (the
“Act”), and provided that the interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, is
paid in the ordinary course of its business within the meaning of section 878 of the Act and in accordance
with the published practice of HM Revenue and Customs (“HMRC”), the Bank, acting through its London
branch, will be entitled to make payments of interest without withholding or deduction for or on account of
United Kingdom income tax. Payments of interest on Notes which conform to any of the definitions of Tier
I, II or III capital adopted by the Bank of England will not be regarded as paid in the ordinary course of
business for this purpose.

Payments of interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, may be made
without deduction of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax provided that the Notes
issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, are and continue to be listed on a “recognised stock
exchange” within the meaning of section 1005 of the Act. The Luxembourg Stock Exchange is a recognised
stock exchange. Under a HMRC interpretation, the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London
branch, will satisfy this requirement if they are listed by the competent authority in Luxembourg and are
admitted to trading by the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. Provided, therefore, that the Notes issued by the
Bank, acting through its London branch, are and remain so listed, interest on the Notes will be payable
without withholding or deduction on account of United Kingdom income tax whether or not the Bank, acting
through its London branch, carries on a banking business in the United Kingdom and whether or not the
interest is paid in the ordinary course of its business.
In addition, interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, may be paid without
withholding or deduction on account of United Kingdom income tax where interest on these Notes is paid
by the Bank, acting through its London branch, and, at the time the payment is made, the Bank, acting
through its London branch, reasonably believes (and any person by or through whom interest on the Notes
is paid reasonably believes) that the beneficial owner is within the charge to United Kingdom corporation
tax as regards the payment of interest; provided that HMRC has not given a direction (in circumstances
where it has reasonable grounds to believe that the above exemption is not available in respect of such
payment of interest at the time the payment is made) that the interest should be paid under deduction of tax.
Interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, may also be paid without
withholding or deduction on account of United Kingdom income tax where the maturity of the Notes is less
than 365 days and those Notes do not form part of a scheme or arrangement of borrowing intended to be
capable of remaining outstanding for more than 364 days.
In other cases, an amount must generally be withheld from payments of interest on the Notes issued by the
Bank, acting through its London branch, on account of United Kingdom income tax at the basic rate
(currently 20 per cent.). However, where an applicable double tax treaty provides for a lower rate of
withholding tax (or for no tax to be withheld) in relation to a Noteholder, the Noteholder may apply to
HMRC for the issue of a notice to the Bank, acting through its London branch, to pay interest to the
Noteholder without deduction of tax (or for interest to be paid with tax deducted at the rate provided for in
the relevant double tax treaty).




                                                    267
Payment of interest on the Notes issued by BES Finance or by the Bank (otherwise than through its
London branch)
Provided that payments of interest on these Notes have a source outside the United Kingdom, they may be
made without deduction of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax.

HMRC’s power to obtain information
Noteholders may wish to note that, in certain circumstances, HMRC has power to obtain information
(including the name and address of the beneficial owner of the interest) from any person in the United
Kingdom who either pays or credits interest to or receives interest for the benefit of a Noteholder. HMRC
also has power, in certain circumstances, to obtain information from any person in the United Kingdom who
pays amounts payable on the redemption of Notes which are deeply discounted securities for the purposes
of the Income Tax (Trading and Other Income) Act 2005 to or receives such amounts for the benefit of
another person, although HMRC published practice indicates that HMRC will not exercise the power
referred to above to require this information in respect of amounts payable on the redemption of deeply
discounted securities where such amounts are paid on or before 5th April, 2011. Such information may
include the name and address of the beneficial owner of the amount payable on redemption. Any information
obtained may, in certain circumstances, be exchanged by HMRC with the tax authorities of the jurisdiction
in which the Noteholder is resident for tax purposes.

Payment by the Bank, acting through its London branch, under the Guarantee
Under current United Kingdom law, the Issuers understand that it is not clear whether payments made by the
Bank, acting through its London branch, under the Guarantee to a Noteholder will be subject to any
deduction of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax. In any event, if there were to be any
deduction of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax, the Bank, acting through its London
branch, would be obliged under Condition 8 to gross up for any deduction of or withholding on account of
United Kingdom income tax (subject to the exceptions contained in that Condition).

EU Savings Directive
Under EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC on the taxation of savings income, Member States are required to
provide to the tax authorities of another Member State details of payments of interest or similar income
(similar income for this purpose includes, but is not limited to, payments on redemption of the Notes
representing any discount on the issue of the Notes or any premium payable on redemption) paid by a person
within its jurisdiction to an individual resident in that other Member State or to certain limited types of
entities established in that other Member State. However, for a transitional period, Luxembourg and Austria
are instead required (unless during that period they elect otherwise) to operate a withholding system in
relation to such payments (the ending of such transitional period being dependent upon the conclusion of
certain other agreements relating to information exchange with certain other countries). A number of non-
EU countries and territories including Switzerland adopted similar measures (a withholding system in the
case of Switzerland).

On 15th September, 2008 the European Commission issued a report to the Council of the European Union
on the operation of the Directive, which included the Commission's advice on the need for changes to the
Directive. On 13th November, 2008 the European Commission published a more detailed proposal for
amendments to the Directive, which included a number of suggested changes. The European Parliament
approved an amended version of this proposal on 24th April, 2009 which is under discussion by the
European Council. If any of the proposed changes are made in relation to the Directive, they may amend or
broaden the scope of the requirements described above.

Luxembourg Taxation
The following summary is of a general nature and is included herein solely for information purposes. It is
based on the laws presently in force in Luxembourg, though it is not intended to be, nor should it be
construed to be, legal or tax advice. Prospective investors in the Notes should therefore consult their own




                                                   268
professional advisers as to the effects of state, local or foreign laws, including Luxembourg tax law, to which
they may be subject.

Withholding Tax

(i)    Non-resident holders of Notes
       Under Luxembourg general tax laws currently in force and subject to the laws of 21st June, 2005 (the
       “Laws”) mentioned below, there is no withholding tax on payments of principal, premium or interest
       made to non-resident holders of Notes, nor on accrued but unpaid interest in respect of the Notes, nor
       is any Luxembourg withholding tax payable upon redemption or repurchase of the Notes held by non-
       resident holders of Notes.

       Under the Laws implementing the EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC of 3rd June, 2003 on taxation of
       savings income in the form of interest payments and ratifying the treaties entered into by Luxembourg
       and certain dependent and associated territories of EU Member States (the “Territories”), payments of
       interest or similar income made or ascribed by a paying agent established in Luxembourg to or for the
       immediate benefit of an individual beneficial owner or a residual entity, as defined by the Laws, which
       is a resident of, or established in, an EU Member State (other than Luxembourg) or one of the
       Territories will be subject to a withholding tax unless the relevant recipient has adequately instructed
       the relevant paying agent to provide details of the relevant payments of interest or similar income to
       the fiscal authorities of his/her/its country of residence or establishment, or, in the case of an
       individual beneficial owner, has provided a tax certificate issued by the fiscal authorities of his/her
       country of residence in the required format to the relevant paying agent. Where withholding tax is
       applied, it is currently levied at a rate of 20 per cent. and will be levied at a rate of 35 per cent. as of
       1st July, 2011. Responsibility for the withholding of the tax will be assumed by the Luxembourg
       paying agent. Payments of interest under the Notes coming within the scope of the Laws would at
       present be subject to withholding tax of 20 per cent.

(ii)   Resident holders of Notes
       Under Luxembourg general tax laws currently in force and subject to the law of 23rd December, 2005
       (the “Law”) mentioned below, there is no withholding tax on payments of principal, premium or
       interest made to Luxembourg resident holders of Notes, nor on accrued but unpaid interest in respect
       of Notes, nor is any Luxembourg withholding tax payable upon redemption or repurchase of Notes
       held by Luxembourg resident holders of Notes.

       Under the Law payments of interest or similar income made or ascribed by a paying agent established
       in Luxembourg to or for the benefit of an individual beneficial owner who is a resident of Luxembourg
       will be subject to a withholding tax of 10 per cent. Such withholding tax will be in full discharge of
       income tax if the beneficial owner is an individual acting in the course of the management of his/her
       private wealth. Responsibility for the withholding of the tax will be assumed by the Luxembourg
       paying agent. Payments of interest under the Notes coming within the scope of the Law would be
       subject to withholding tax of 10 per cent.




                                                       269
                                                Annex 1

     STATEMENT OF NON-PORTUGUESE BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP
The undersigned beneficiary:

Name:                                                 [l]

Address:                                              [l]

Tax identification number:                            [l]

holding via the following financial intermediary:

Name of the financial intermediary:                   [l]

Account number:

the following securities:                             [l]

Common/ISIN code:                                     [l]

Security name:                                        [l]

Payment date:                                         [l]

Nominal amount:                                       [l]

1.      Hereby declares that he/she/it is the beneficial owner of the above-mentioned securities and nominal
        amount at the payment date....../....../......; and

2.      Hereby declares that he/she/it is not subject to withholding tax, in accordance with the applicable
        legislation, indicated hereinafter.

        Article 33 of the Tax Benefits Statute (Estatuto dos Benefícios Fiscais) – Zona Franca da Madeira e
        Zona Franca da ilha de Santa Maria.

        This document is to be provided to the Portuguese tax authorities, if requested by the latter, as
        foreseen in section b), n° 2 and section b), n° 7, both of article 119 of CIRS

        Authorised signatory:

        Name:                                         [l]

        Title:                                        [l]

        Signature:                                    [l]




                                                    270
                                                                        Annex 2
CERTIFICATE FOR EXEMPTION FROM PORTUGUESE WITHHOLDING TAX ON INCOME
ARISING FROM DEBT SECURITIES (PARAGRAPH 1 OF ARTICLE 17 OF THE SPECIAL TAX
REGIME APPROVED BY THE DECREE-LAW 193/2005, OF 7 NOVEMBER)

The undersigned Participant hereby declares that he holds debt securities covered by the special tax regime
approved by Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November (the Securities), in the following securities account
number .......... (the Account) with .......... (name and complete address of the international clearing system
managing entity).

We will hold these Securities in our capacity of beneficial owner or in our capacity of intermediary, holding
Securities on behalf of one or more beneficial owners, including ourselves, if applicable, all of whom are
eligible for exemption at source from Portuguese withholding tax according to Portuguese legislation.

1.    We are:

      Name:.......................................................................................................................................................

      Residence for tax purposes (full address): ..............................................................................................

      Tax ID Number: .......................................................................................................................................

2.    We hereby certify that, from the date hereof until the expiry date of this certificate:

A.    We are the Beneficial Owner of the following Securities:

      Security ISIN or Common Code                                         Security description                                 Nominal position
      ——————————————                                                      ——————————                                           ——————————
      •

      And we hereby declare that we are not liable to Portuguese withholding tax, in accordance with the
      applicable legislation, indicated hereafter:

      • Special Tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November

      • Art. 97 of CIRC (Corporate Income Tax Code) – Exemption from withholding tax

B.    We are intermediaries of the following Securities:

      Security ISIN or Common Code                                         Security description                                 Nominal position
      ——————————————                                                      ——————————                                           ——————————
      •

      which are held on behalf of:

      Name: ...................................................................................Residence for tax purposes (full address):

       .................................................................................................................................................................

      Tax ID Number: ...........................................................................................................................and we
      attach a statement of beneficial ownership, which includes the justification for the exemption of
      personal or corporate income withholding tax.

3.    We hereby undertake to provide the .......... (name of the international clearing system managing
      entity) with a document proving the exemption of personal or corporate income tax referred to in the
      attached statement of beneficial ownership, whenever the beneficial owner is not a central bank,
      public institution, international body, credit institution, financing company, pension fund and
      insurance company resident in any OECD country or in a country with which Portugal has concluded
      a Convention for the Avoidance of International Double Taxation, on behalf of which we hold
      Portuguese debt securities in the Account.




                                                                              271
4.   We hereby undertake to notify the .......... (name of the international clearing system managing entity)
     promptly in the event that any information contained in this certificate becomes untrue or incomplete.

5.   We acknowledge that certification is required in connection with Portuguese law and we irrevocably
     authorise .......... (name of the international clearing system managing entity) and its Depositary to
     collect and forward this certificate or a copy hereof, any attachments and any information relating to
     it, to the Portuguese authorities, including tax authorities.

6.   This certificate is valid for a period of 12 months as from the date of signature:

     Place: .......................................... Date: ...........................................

     .................................................... .................................................... ....................................................
     Authorised Signatory                                 Name                                                 Title/Position

     .................................................... .................................................... ....................................................
     Authorised Signatory                                 Name                                                 Title/Position




                                                                            272
                                                                       APPENDIX

                              STATEMENT OF BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP
The undersigned beneficiary:

Name:..................................................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Address: ..............................................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Tax identification number:..................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Holding via the following financial intermediary:

Name of the financial intermediary:...................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Account number: ...............................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

The following securities:

Common/ISIN code:...........................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Security name: ....................................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Payment date: ....................................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Nominal position: ..............................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

1.        Hereby declares that he/she/it is the beneficial owner of the above-mentioned securities and nominal
          position at the payment date ....../....../......; and

2.        Hereby declares that he/she/it is not liable to withholding tax, in accordance with the applicable
          legislation, indicated hereinafter (tick where applicable):

          •         Special Tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November...............

          •         Art. 97 of CIRC (Corporate Income Tax Code) – Exemption from withholding tax

          •         Art. 9 of CIRC – State, Autonomous Regions, local authorities, their associations governed by
                    public law and social security federations and institutions

          •         Art. 10 of CIRC – General Public Interest Companies, Charities and other non-governmental
                    social entities; exemption by the Ministerial Regulation n°.................., published in Diàrio da
                    República...............



                                                                                  273
          •         Art. 16 of EBF (Tax Incentives Statute) – Pension Funds and assimilated funds

          •         Art. 21 of EBF – Retirement Savings Funds (FPR)

          •         Art. 23 of EBF – Venture Capital Investment Funds

          •         Art. 26 of EBF – Stock Savings Funds (FPA)

          •         Other legislation (indicate which)

This document is to be provided to the Portuguese tax authorities, if requested by the latter, as foreseen in
the Article 17 of the Special Tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November.

Authorised signatory:

Name: .................................................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................

Function: .............................................................................................................................................................

Signature:............................................................................................................................................................

............................................................................................................................................................................




                                                                                  274
                                                                       Annex 3
STATEMENT FOR EXEMPTION FROM PORTUGUESE WITHHOLDING TAX ON INCOME ARISING
FROM DEBT SECURITIES (PARAGRAPH 2 OF ARTICLE 17 OF THE SPECIAL TAX REGIME
APPROVED BY THE DECREE-LAW 193/2005, OF 7 NOVEMBER)

The undersigned Participant hereby declares that he holds or will hold debt securities covered by the special
tax regime approved by Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November (the “Securities”), in the following
securities account number .............. (the “Account”) with .............. (name and complete address of the
international clearing system managing entity).

We hold or will hold these Securities in our capacity of beneficial owner or in our capacity of intermediary,
holding Securities on behalf of one or more beneficial owners, including ourselves, if applicable, all of whom
are eligible for exemption at source from Portuguese withholding tax according to Portuguese legislation.

1.    We are:

      Name:.......................................................................................................................................................

      Residence for tax purposes (full address): .............................................................................................

      Tax ID Number: .......................................................................................................................................

2.    We hereby undertake to provide the .............. (name of the international clearing system managing
      entity) with a list of Beneficial Owners at each relevant record date containing the name, residence for
      tax purposes, Tax Identification Number and nominal position of Portuguese debt Securities for each
      Beneficial Owner, including ourselves if relevant, on behalf of which we hold or will hold Portuguese
      debt securities in the Account.

3.    We hereby undertake to notify the .............. (name of the international clearing system managing
      entity) promptly in the event that any information contained in this certificate becomes untrue or
      incomplete.

4.    We acknowledge that certification is required in connection with Portuguese law and we irrevocably
      authorise .............. (name of the international clearing system managing entity) and its Depositary to
      collect and forward this certificate or a copy hereof, any attachments and any information relating to
      it, to the Portuguese authorities, including tax authorities.

5.    This certificate is valid for a period of 12 months as from the date of signature:

      Place: .......................................... Date: ...........................................

      .................................................... .................................................... ....................................................
      Authorised Signatory                                 Name                                                 Title/Position

      .................................................... .................................................... ....................................................
      Authorised Signatory                                 Name                                                 Title/Position




                                                                             275
                                                                   APPENDIX

                                          LIST OF BENEFICIAL OWNERS
For:

Interest due ......../......../........

Security code (ISIN or Common Code):............................................................................................................

Security description: ...........................................................................................................................................

Securities Clearance Account Number:..............................................................................................................

We certify that the above Portuguese debt securities are held on behalf of the following Beneficial Owners:
                                                                              Legal basis of the exemption
                                      Tax
                                                                                   from withholding tax
                           identification Residence for        Quantity of
Name                             number     tax purposes        Securities           Code(*) Legislation(**)
—————————— —————– —————— —————— —————— ——————
•
(*) Indicate the legal basis of the exemption from withholding tax in accordance with the following table:


Code Legal basis of the exemption
1     Special tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November
2     Art. 97 of CIRC (Corporate Income Tax Code) – Exemption from withholding tax
3     Art. 9 of CIRC – State, Autonomous Regions, local authorities, their associations governed by public law and social security
      federations and institutions
4     Art. 10 of CIRC – General Public Interest Companies, Charities and other non-governmental social entities
5     Art. 16 of EBF (Tax Incentives Statute) – Pension Funds and assimilated funds
6     Art. 21 of EBF – Retirement Savings Funds (FPR)
7     Art. 23 of EBF – Venture Capital Investments Funds
8     Art. 26 of EBF – Stock Savings Funds (FPA)
9     Other legislation
(**) The fulfilment of this column is mandatory when the code “9” is indicated in the previous column.




                                                                             276
                                                                                                                     A5.4.1.3
                                  SUBSCRIPTION AND SALE
                                                                                                                     A12.4.1.10

The Dealers have in an amended and restated programme agreement (the “Programme Agreement”) dated
18th February, 2009, agreed with the Issuers a basis upon which they or any of them may from time to time
agree to purchase Notes. Any such agreement will extend to those matters stated under “Form of the Notes”
and “Terms and Conditions of the Notes” above. In the Programme Agreement, the Issuers have agreed to
reimburse the Dealers for certain of their expenses in connection with the establishment and any future
update of the Programme and the issue of Notes under the Programme.

United States
The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act and may not be offered or sold
within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons except in certain transactions
exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. Terms used in this paragraph have the
meanings given to them by Regulation S under the Securities Act.

The Notes are subject to U.S. tax law requirements and may not be offered, sold or delivered within the
United States or its possessions or to a United States person, except in certain transactions permitted by U.S.
tax regulations. Terms used in this paragraph have the meanings given to them by the U.S. Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 and regulations thereunder.

Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be
required to represent and agree that it will not offer, sell or deliver Notes (i) as part of their distribution at
any time and (ii) otherwise until 40 days after the completion of the distribution, as determined and certified
by the relevant Dealer, or in the case of an issue of Notes on a syndicated basis, the relevant lead manager,
of all Notes of the Tranche of which such Notes are a part, within the United States or to, or for the account
or benefit of, U.S. persons. Each Dealer has further agreed, and each further Dealer appointed under the
Programme will be required to agree, that it will send to each dealer to which it sells Notes during the
distribution compliance period a confirmation or other notice setting forth the restrictions on offers and sales
of the Notes within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons. Terms used in the
preceding paragraph and in this paragraph have the meanings given to them by Regulation S under the
Securities Act.

Until 40 days after the commencement of the offering of any Series of Notes, an offer or sale of such Notes
within the United States by any dealer (whether or not participating in the offering) may violate the
registration requirements of the Securities Act if the offer or sale is made otherwise than in accordance with
an available exemption from registration under the Securities Act.

Each issuance of Index Linked Notes and Dual Currency Notes shall be subject to such additional U.S.
selling restrictions as the Issuer and the relevant Dealer or Dealers shall agree as a term of the issuance and
purchase of such Notes, which additional selling restrictions shall be set out in the applicable Final Terms.

Public Offer Selling Restriction under the Prospectus Directive
In relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus
Directive (each, a “Relevant Member State”), each Dealer has represented and agreed, and each further
Dealer appointed under the Programme will be required to represent and agree, that with effect from and
including the date on which the Prospectus Directive is implemented in that Relevant Member State (the
“Relevant Implementation Date”) it has not made and will not make an offer of Notes which are the subject
of the offering contemplated by this Prospectus as completed by the final terms in relation thereto to the
public in that Relevant Member State, except that it may, with effect from and including the Relevant
Implementation Date, make an offer of such Notes to the public in that Relevant Member State:

(a)    if the final terms in relation to the Notes specify that an offer of those Notes may be made other than
       pursuant to Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive in that Relevant Member State (a “Non-exempt
       Offer”), following the date of publication of a prospectus in relation to such Notes which has been
       approved by the competent authority in that Relevant Member State or, where appropriate, approved


                                                       277
        in another Relevant Member State and notified to the competent authority in that Relevant Member
        State, provided that any such prospectus has subsequently been completed by the final terms
        contemplating such Non-exempt Offer, in accordance with the Prospectus Directive, in the period
        beginning and ending on the dates specified in such prospectus or final terms, as applicable;

(b)     at any time to legal entities which are authorised or regulated to operate in the financial markets or, if
        not so authorised or regulated, whose corporate purpose is solely to invest in securities;

(c)     at any time to any legal entity which has two or more of (1) an average of at least 250 employees
        during the last financial year; (2) a total balance sheet of more than €43,000,000; and (3) an annual
        net turnover of more than €50,000,000, as shown in its last annual or consolidated accounts;

(d)     at any time to fewer than 100 natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in the
        Prospectus Directive) subject to obtaining the prior consent of the relevant Dealer or Dealers
        nominated by the Issuer for any such offer; or

(e)     at any time in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive,

provided that no such offer of Notes referred to in (b) to (e) above shall require the Issuers or any Dealer to
publish a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive or supplement a prospectus pursuant
to Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.

For the purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer of Notes to the public” in relation to any Notes
in any Relevant Member State means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient
information on the terms of the offer and the Notes to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to
purchase or subscribe the Notes, as the same may be varied in that Member State by any measure
implementing the Prospectus Directive in that Member State and the expression “Prospectus Directive”
means Directive 2003/71/EC and includes any relevant implementing measure in each Relevant Member
State.

United Kingdom
Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be
required to represent and agree that:

(i)     in relation to any Notes issued by BES Finance which have a maturity of less than one year, (a) it is
        a person whose ordinary activities involve it in acquiring, holding, managing or disposing of
        investments (as principal or agent) for the purposes of its business and (b) it has not offered or sold
        and will not offer or sell any Notes other than to persons whose ordinary activities involve them in
        acquiring, holding, managing or disposing of investments (as principal or as agent) for the purposes
        of their businesses or who it is reasonable to expect will acquire, hold, manage or dispose of
        investments (as principal or agent) for the purposes of their businesses where the issue of the Notes
        would otherwise constitute a contravention of Section 19 of the FSMA by the Issuer; and

(ii)    it has only communicated or caused to be communicated and will only communicate or cause to be
        communicated an invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the meaning of
        Section 21 of the FSMA) received by it in connection with the issue or sale of any Notes in
        circumstances in which Section 21(1) of the FSMA does not or, in the case of the Bank would not, if
        it was not an authorised person, apply to BES Finance or the Bank; and

(iii)   it has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to anything
        done by it in relation to any Notes in, from or otherwise involving the United Kingdom.

Japan
The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the Financial Instruments and Exchange Act of
Japan (Law No. 25 of 1948; as amended, the “FIEA”). Each Dealer has represented and agreed, and each
further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be required to represent and agree, that it will not offer
or sell any Notes, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for the benefit of, any resident of Japan (as defined


                                                       278
under item 5, Paragraph 1, Article 6 of the Foreign Exchange and Foreign Trade Control Law (Law No. 228
of 1949, as amended) or to others for reoffering or resale, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for the
benefit of, a resident of Japan, except pursuant to an exemption from the registration requirements of, and
otherwise in compliance with, the FIEA and any other applicable laws and regulations and ministerial
guidelines of Japan.

The Cayman Islands
Each Dealer has represented and agreed that no invitation will be made to the public in the Cayman Islands
to subscribe for or purchase any Notes, whether directly or indirectly.

Portugal (including Madeira)
Each Dealer has represented and agreed that: (i) no document, circular, advertisement or any offering
material in relation to the Notes has been or will be subject to approval by the Portuguese Securities Market
Commission (“Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliàrios”, the “CMVM”); (ii) it has not directly or
indirectly advertised, offered, submitted to an investment gathering procedure or sold and will not, directly
or indirectly, advertise, offer, submit to an investment gathering procedure, sell, re-sell or re-offer the Notes
in circumstances which could qualify as a public offer of securities pursuant to the Portuguese Securities
Code (“Código dos Valores Mobiliàrios”, the “CVM”); (iii) it has not distributed or caused to be distributed
and will not distribute or cause to be distributed to the public in Portugal the Prospectus or any other offering
material relating to the Notes; (iv) all offers, sales and distributions of the Notes have been and will only be
made in Portugal in circumstances that, pursuant to the CVM, do not qualify as a public placement of Notes
(“oferta pública”); (v) pursuant to the CVM, a private placement of Notes in Portugal or to Portuguese
residents by public companies (“sociedades abertas”) or by companies that are issuers of securities listed on
a market needs to be notified to the CMVM for statistical purposes; (vi) all applicable provisions of the CVM
and any applicable CMVM Regulations and all relevant laws and regulations have been complied with
regarding the Notes, in any matters involving Portugal and the placement or distribution of Notes in the
Portuguese market. Each Dealer has represented and agreed that it shall comply with all applicable laws and
regulations in force in Portugal and with the Directive 2003/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 4th November, 2003, regarding the placement of any Notes in the Portuguese jurisdiction or to
any entities which are resident in Portugal, including the publication of a Prospectus, when applicable, and
that such placement shall only be authorised and performed to the extent that there is full compliance with
such laws and regulations.

Republic of Italy
Each Dealer has represented and agreed that the offering of the Notes has not been registered pursuant to
Italian securities legislation and, accordingly, no Notes may be offered, sold or delivered, nor may copies of
this Prospectus or of any other document relating to the Notes be distributed in the Republic of Italy, except:

(i)    to qualified investors (investitori qualificati), as defined pursuant to Article 100 of Legislative Decree
       No. 58 of 24th February, 1998, as amended (the Financial Services Act) and Article 34-ter, first
       paragraph, letter b) of CONSOB Regulation No. 11971 of 14th May, 1999, as amended from time to
       time (Regulation No. 11971); or

(ii)   in other circumstances which are exempted from the rules on public offerings pursuant to Article 100
       of the Financial Services Act and Regulation No. 11971.

Any offer, sale or delivery of the Notes or distribution of copies of this Prospectus or any other document
relating to the Notes in the Republic of Italy under (i) or (ii) above must be:

(a)    made by an investment firm, bank or financial intermediary permitted to conduct such activities in the
       Republic of Italy in accordance with the Financial Services Act, CONSOB Regulation No. 16190 of
       29th October, 2007 (as amended from time to time) and Legislative Decree No. 385 of
       1st September, 1993, as amended (the Banking Act); and




                                                      279
(b)    in compliance with Article 129 of the Banking Act, as amended, and the implementing guidelines of
       the Bank of Italy, as amended from time to time, pursuant to which the Bank of Italy may request
       information on the issue or the offer of securities of the Republic of Italy; and

(c)    in compliance with any other applicable laws and regulations or requirement imposed by CONSOB
       or other Italian authority.

Please note that in accordance with Article 100-bis of the Financial Services Act, where no exemption from
the rules on solicitation of investments applies under (i) and (ii) above, the subsequent distribution of Notes
with a denomination of less than €50,000 (or its equivalent in another currency) on the secondary market in
Italy must be made in compliance with the public offer and the prospectus requirement rules provided under
the Financial Services Act and Regulation No. 11971. Failure to comply with such rules may result in the
sale of such Notes being declared null and void and in the liability of the intermediary transferring the
financial instruments for any damages suffered by the investors.

General
Each Dealer has agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be required to agree
that it will (to the best of its knowledge and belief) comply with all applicable securities laws and regulations
in force in any jurisdiction in which it purchases, offers, sells or delivers Notes or possesses or distributes
this Prospectus and will obtain any consent, approval or permission required by it for the purchase, offer, sale
or delivery by it of Notes under the laws and regulations in force in any jurisdiction to which it is subject or
in which it makes such purchases, offers, sales or deliveries and neither the Issuers, the Bank (where the
Issuer is BES Finance) nor any of the other Dealers shall have any responsibility therefor.

None of the Issuers, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES France) and the Dealers represents that Notes may
at any time lawfully be sold in compliance with any applicable registration or other requirements in any
jurisdiction, or pursuant to any exemption available thereunder, or assumes any responsibility for facilitating
such sale.

With regard to each Tranche, the relevant Dealer will be required to comply with such other additional
restrictions as the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer shall agree and as shall be set out in the applicable
Final Terms.




                                                      280
                                  GENERAL INFORMATION

Authorisation
The establishment and update of the Programme and the issue of Notes have been duly authorised by                 A5.4.11

resolutions of the Board of Directors of BES Finance dated 21st January, 1997, 2nd February, 1998,                A12.4.1.8

12th May, 1999, 16th August, 1999, by a Unanimous Written Resolution of the Board of Directors of BES
Finance dated 3rd September, 1999 by resolutions of the Board of Directors of BES Finance dated
14th August, 2000, 24th July, 2001, 23rd July, 2003, 5th August, 2004, 30th November, 2005, 16th February,
2007, 11th January, 2008, 12th February, 2009, 10th December, 2009 and 25th October, 2010. The giving of
the guarantee in respect of any Notes issued by BES Finance and the update of the Programme has been
authorised by resolutions of the Board of Directors of the Bank dated 23rd January, 1997, 17th September,
1998, 9th August, 1999, 28th July, 2000, 23rd July, 2001, 17th July, 2002, 21st July, 2003, 30th July, 2004,
23rd November, 2005, 7th February, 2007, 9th January, 2008, 11th February, 2009, 14th December, 2009
and 25th October, 2010.

Approval, admission to trading and listing of Notes on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange                              A5.5.1.1
                                                                                                                  A5.6.1
Application has been made to the CSSF to approve this document as a base prospectus. Application has also
                                                                                                                  A5.6.2
been made to the Luxembourg Stock Exchange for Notes issued under the Programme to be admitted to
                                                                                                                  A12.6.1
trading on the regulated market and listed on the official list of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. The
                                                                                                                  A12.5.1.1
Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s regulated market is a regulated market for the purposes of the Markets in
                                                                                                                  A12.6.2
Financial Instruments Directive (Directive 2004/39/EC).

Trustee’s reliance on Certificates
The Trust Deed provides that any certificate or report of the auditors or any other person called for by or
provided to the Trustee (whether or not addressed to the Trustee) in accordance with or for the purposes of
the Trust Deed may be relied upon by the Trustee as sufficient evidence of the facts stated therein
notwithstanding that such certificate or report and/or any engagement letter or other document entered into
by the Trustee in connection therewith contains a monetary or other limit on the liability of the Auditors or
such other person in respect thereof and notwithstanding that the scope and/or basis of such certificate or
report may be limited by any engagement or similar letter or by the terms of the certificate or report itself.

Documents Available
So long as Notes are outstanding under the Programme, copies of the following documents will, when                A11.14

published, be available from the registered office of each of the Issuers and from the specified offices of the   A4.17

Paying Agents for the time being in London, Lisbon and Luxembourg:

(i)     the constitutional documents of each Issuer (in each case in English);

(ii)    the audited non-consolidated financial statements of BES Finance in respect of the financial years
        ended 31st December, 2008 and 31st December, 2009, in each case together with the audit reports
        prepared in connection therewith and the unaudited non-consolidated interim Financial Statements of
        BES Finance for the six months ended 30th June, 2010;

(iii)   the audited consolidated financial statements of the Bank in respect of the financial years ended
        31st December, 2008 and 31st December, 2009 (with an English translation thereof), in each case
        together with the audit reports prepared in connection therewith and the unaudited consolidated
        interim Financial Statements of the Bank for the six months ended 30th June, 2010 (with an English
        translation thereof);

(iv)    the most recently published audited annual financial statements of BES Finance and the most recently
        published audited annual consolidated financial statements of the Bank and the most recently
        published unaudited interim (semi-annual) consolidated financial statements of the Bank (with an




                                                     281
       English translation thereof) in each case together with any audit or review reports prepared in
       connection therewith;

(v)    the most recently published audited annual non-consolidated financial statements and the most
       recently published unaudited interim (semi-annual) non-consolidated financial statements of the Bank
       in each case together with any audit or review reports prepared in connection therewith;

(vi)   The press release of the Bank presenting the unaudited consolidated financial results for the period
       ended 30th September, 2010;

(vii) the Programme Agreement, the Agency Agreement, the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the                   A6.4.1

       Trust Deed, any agreement appointing a Common Representative, the forms of the Temporary Global
      Notes, the Permanent Global Notes, the Definitive Notes, the Receipts, the Coupons and the Talons;

(viii) a copy of this Prospectus; and

(ix)   any future prospectuses, information memoranda, supplements and Final Terms (save that a Final
       Terms relating to a Note which is neither admitted to trading on a regulated market in the European
       Economic Area nor offered in the European Economic Area in circumstances where a prospectus is
       required to be published under the Prospectus Directive will only be available for inspection by a
       holder of such Note and such holder must produce evidence satisfactory to the Paying Agent as to the
       identity of such holder) to this Prospectus and any other documents incorporated herein or therein by
       reference.

In addition, copies of this Prospectus, each Final Terms relating to Notes which are admitted to trading on
the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s regulated market and each document incorporated by reference are
available on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s website (www.bourse.lu).

Clearing Systems
The Notes (other than Interbolsa Notes) have been accepted for clearance through Euroclear and
Clearstream, Luxembourg (which are the entities in charge of keeping the records in respect of such Notes).
The appropriate Common Code and ISIN for each Tranche allocated by Euroclear and Clearstream,
Luxembourg will be specified in the relevant Final Terms. The Interbolsa Notes will be cleared through LCH
Clearnet, S.A., the clearing system operated at Interbolsa; the appropriate identification reference for a
Tranche of Interbolsa Notes will be specified in the applicable Final Terms. At the date hereof Interbolsa only
accepts to clear notes denominated in euro. If the Notes are to clear through an additional or alternative
clearing system the appropriate information will be specified in the relevant Final Terms.

Conditions for determining price
The price and amount of Notes to be issued under the Programme will be determined by the Issuer and the
relevant Dealer at the time of issue in accordance with prevailing market conditions.

Financial Statements
The financial statements of the BES Group are prepared in accordance with the International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS) as adopted for use in the European Union.

Significant or Material Change
Save as disclosed in this Prospectus, there has been no significant change in the financial or trading position   A11.7.1

of BES Finance since 30th June, 2010 and the Bank and the Group since 30th June, 2010.                            A11.11.7

                                                                                                                  A4.8.1
There has been no material adverse change in the financial position or prospects of BES Finance or the Bank
or the Group since 31st December, 2009.                                                                           A4.13.7




                                                     282
Litigation                                                                                                           A11.11.6

There are no governmental, legal or arbitration proceedings (including any such proceedings which are                A4.13.6

pending or threatened of which either Issuer is aware) which may have or have had in the past 12 months a
significant effect on the financial position or profitability of either Issuer or the Bank and its subsidiaries as
a whole nor is either Issuer aware of any such proceedings being threatened.

Auditors                                                                                                             A4.2.1
                                                                                                                     A11.11.3.1
KPMG and Associados, SROC, S.A. Edificio Monumental, Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º 1069 – 006,
                                                                                                                     A4.13.3.1
Lisbon, Portugal, chartered accountants and registered auditors, a member of Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais
                                                                                                                     A11.2.1
de Contas, are the appointed auditors of BES Finance and have audited the respective financial statements
for the years ending 31st December, 2008 and 2009 prepared in accordance with International Financial
Reporting Standards.

KPMG and Associados, SROC, S.A. Edificio Monumental, Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º 1069 – 006,                  A.5.7.3

Lisbon, Portugal, chartered accountants and registered auditors, a member of Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais            A11.13.1

de Contas, are the appointed auditors of the Bank and have audited the respective financial statements for           A12.7.3

the years ending 31st December, 2008 and 31st December, 2009 prepared in accordance with the
International aFinancial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as adopted by the European Union.

Bank of Portugal requirements
No Dated Subordinated Note or Undated Subordinated Notes shall be redeemed unless in compliance with
the applicable capital adequacy regulations of the Bank of Portugal from time to time in force. At the date
hereof such redemption may not occur within five years and one day from the Issue Date of the relevant
Notes and may only occur with the prior consent of the Bank of Portugal.




                                                       283
                                    THE ISSUERS
Registered Head Office of Banco Espírito               Cayman Islands Branch of BES
               Santo, S.A.                                  PO BOX 10507 APO
        Avenida da Liberdade, 195                      Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands         A11.4.1.4
            1250-195 Lisbon                                  British West Indies            A4.5.1.4
                Portugal                                   Tel. +351 21 350 86 87           A12.1.1
                                                                                            A5.1.1
         Tel. +351 21 350 11 57                           Fax. +351 21 350 89 32            A4.1.1
         Fax. +351 21 350 11 80                                                             A11.1.1


           BES Finance Ltd.                        Madeira Free Trade Zone Branch of BES
  c/o Maples Corporate Services Limited                     Avenida Arriaga, nº 44
       PO Box 309, Ugland House                           Edificio Arriaga, 1º Andar
             Grand Cayman                                     9000-064 Funchal
               KY1-1104                                            Portugal
             Cayman Islands                                Tel. +351 21 350 86 87
         Tel. +351 21 350 86 87                            Fax. +351 21 350 89 32
        Fax. +351 21 350 89 32

REGISTERED HEAD OFFICE OF THE                          LONDON BRANCH OF THE
         GUARANTOR                                         GUARANTOR
       Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.                        Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
        Avenida da Liberdade 195                           10 Paternoster Square
           1250 – 142 Lisboa                                London EC4M 7AL
                Portugal                                         England

                                          TRUSTEE
                              The Bank of New York Mellon
                                   One Canada Square
                                    London E14 5AL
                                        England

                                           AGENT                                           A5.5.4.2
                                                                                           A12.5.4.2
                              The Bank of New York Mellon
                                   One Canada Square
                                    London E14 5AL
                                        England

                             PORTUGUESE PAYING AGENT
                                Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                Avenida da Liberdade, 195
                                    1250-195 Lisbon
                                        Portugal




                                            284
                                          PAYING AGENT                                                  A5.5.4.2
                                                                                                        A12.5.4.2
                       The Bank of New York Mellon (Luxembourg) S.A.
                               Aerogolf Center, 1A, Hoehenhof
                                    L-1736 Senningerberg
                                        Luxembourg

                                         LEGAL ADVISERS
To Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. both as Issuer and     To the Issuers as to Cayman Islands law
       Guarantor as to Portuguese law
      Vieira de Almeida & Associados                           Maples and Calder
       Sociedade de Advogados R.L.                               7 Princes Street
          Mouzinho da Silveira, 10                              London EC2R 8AQ
              1250 – 167 Lisboa                                      England
                   Portugal

       To the Dealers as to English law             To the Issuer and the Guarantor as to English law
             Allen & Overy LLP                           Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
             One Bishops Square                                       65 Fleet Street
               London E1 6AD                                       London EC4Y 1HS
                   England                                               England

                                           AUDITORS
           To BES Finance Ltd.                              To Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
     KPMG & Associados, SROC, S.A.                        KPMG & Associados, SROC, S.A.
           Edificio Monumental                                  Edificio Monumental
     Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º                   Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º             A11.2.1
            1069 – 006 Lisboa                                    1069 – 006 Lisboa                       A4.2.1
                  Portugal                                             Portugal




                                              285
                                           DEALERS
              Banca IMI S.p.A.                                Banco Espírito Santo S.A.
               Largo Mattioli 3                               Avenida da Liberdade 195
                20121 Milan                                      1250 – 142 Lisboa             A12.5.4.1
                    Italy                                             Portugal
             Barclays Bank PLC                                      BNP Paribas
            5 The North Colonnade                                10 Harewood Avenue
                Canary Wharf                                      London NW1 6AA
               London E14 4BB                                      United Kingdom
               United Kingdom
      Citigroup Global Markets Limited                   Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft
               Citigroup Centre                            Kaiserstraße 16 (Kaiserplatz)
                Canada Square                               60311 Frankfurt am Maim
                Canary Wharf                                         Germany
               London E14 5LB
               United Kingdom
Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank                   Credit Suisse Securities
        9 Quai du Président Paul Doumer                           (Europe) Limited
        92920 – Paris La Defense Cedex                            One Cabot Square
                     France                                        London E14 4QJ
                                                                   United Kingdom
     Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch                         Goldman Sachs International
               Winchester House                                   Peterborough Court
           1 Great Winchester Street                                133 Fleet Street
              London EC2N 2DB                                     London EC4A 2BB
               United Kingdom                                      United Kingdom
               HSBC Bank plc                                 J.P. Morgan Securities Ltd.
               8 Canada Square                                     125 London Wall
               London E14 5HQ                                     London EC2Y 5AJ
               United Kingdom                                      United Kingdom
      Landesbank Baden-Württemberg                           Merrill Lynch International
            Am Hauptbahnhof 2                                   2 King Edward Street
              70173 Stuttgart                                    London EC1A 1HQ
                 Germany                                          United Kingdom
  Mitsubishi UFJ Securities International plc         Morgan Stanley & Co. International plc
               Ropemaker Place                                  25 Cabot Square
             25 Ropemaker Street                                 Canary Wharf
              London EC2Y 9AJ                                   London E14 4QA
               United Kingdom                                   United Kingdom
          Nomura International plc                       The Royal Bank of Scotland plc
               Nomura House,                                    135 Bishopsgate
           1, St. Martin’s-le-Grand                           London EC2M 3UR
             London EC1A 4NP                                    United Kingdom
               United Kingdom
              Société Générale                                      UBS Limited
           29 boulevard Haussmann                                 1 Finsbury Avenue
                 75009 Paris                                      London EC2M 2PP
                    France                                         United Kingdom
                                       UniCredit Bank AG
                                        Arabellastrasse 12
                                         81925 Munich
                                            Germany
                              LUXEMBOURG LISTING AGENT
                              KBL European Private Bankers S.A.
                                    43A Boulevard Royal
                                    L-2955 Luxembourg
                                                286
sterling 137832
