899 | Office of Foreign Assets Control
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
The .gov means it’s official.
Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
The site is secure.
The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely.
U.S. Department of the Treasury
Read the latest Treasury news
Office of Foreign Assets Control
A Part of Treasury's Office of Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence
MENU
About OFAC
History
Introductory Document
Video Overview
Recent Actions
Sanctions Lists
Sanctions List Service
Specially Designated Nationals (SDN) List
Consolidated Sanctions List (Non-SDN Lists)
Other OFAC Sanctions Lists
Sanctions List Search
Sanctions Programs
Russia-related Sanctions
Iran Sanctions
North Korea Sanctions
Cuba Sanctions
Counter Narcotics Sanctions
Cyber-related Sanctions
Venezuela-related Sanctions
Complete List of Sanctions Programs and Country Information
Submit a Report
Contact Us
Search
Enter Search Term(s):
Breadcrumb
Home
Frequently Asked Questions
899
Specially Designated Nationals List (SDN List)
Consolidated Sanctions List (Non-SDN Lists)
Additional Sanctions Lists
Search OFAC's Sanctions Lists
Sanctions Programs and Country Information
Recent Actions
OFAC License Application Page
Additional OFAC Resources
Frequently Asked Questions
Civil Penalties and Enforcement Information
OFAC Reporting System
Selected General Licenses Issued by OFAC
Contact OFAC
Chinese Military Companies Sanctions
899. What entities are subject to Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, and when do the prohibitions against such entities go into effect?
Answer
OFAC has published a list on its website containing the names of entities that are subject to the prohibitions of E.O. 13959, as amended, as the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the “NS-CMIC List”), along with additional identifying information where possible. Effective June 3, 2021, the NS-CMIC List replaced and superseded in its entirety the Non-SDN Communist Chinese Military Companies List (NS-CCMC List), which has been deleted from OFAC’s website. Only entities whose names exactly match the names of the entities on the NS-CMIC List are subject to the prohibitions in E.O. 13959, as amended. OFAC will refer to entities listed on the NS-CMIC List as “Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies” or “CMICs.”
For any entity listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended, the prohibitions go into effect beginning at 12:01 a.m. eastern time on August 2, 2021. For any entity not listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended, the prohibitions go into effect beginning at 12:01 a.m. eastern time on the date that is 60 days after the date the entity is listed on the NS-CMIC List.
Purchases or sales of publicly traded securities of CMICs listed in or pursuant to E.O. 13959, as amended, made solely to divest, in whole or in part, such securities by a U.S. person are permitted until 12:01 a.m. eastern time on the date that is 365 days after the date the entity is listed in the Annex to E.O. 13959, as amended, or added to the NS-CMIC List.
Date Released
June 3, 2021
Similar FAQs
857. Do the prohibitions in Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, apply to purchases or sales of publicly traded securities of subsidiaries of entities listed on the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the “NS-CMIC List”)
898. What is the effect of Executive Order (E.O.) of June 3, 2021, “Addressing the Threat from Securities Investments that Finance Certain Companies of the People's Republic of China”?
1046. Are U.S. persons required to divest their current holdings of Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies' (CMIC) securities before the end of the relevant 365-day divestment period pursuant to section 1(c) of Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended?
1048. After the relevant 365-day divestment period, are U.S. financial institutions required to block the attempted purchase or sale of Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies' (CMIC) securities covered by Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended?
905. Does Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, prohibit U.S. persons from engaging in all activities with companies listed on the Non-SDN Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies List (the "NS-CMIC List")?
904. Under Executive Order (E.O.) 13959, as amended, are U.S. market makers permitted to facilitate divestment from publicly traded securities of Chinese Military-Industrial Complex Companies (CMICs)?
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence
Additional Resources
Privacy Act
Small Business Contacts
Budget and Performance
TreasuryDirect.gov Securities/Bonds
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
No FEAR Act Data
Whistleblower Protection
Helpful OFAC Links
Sign Up For OFAC E-mail Alerts
Contact OFAC
Dealing with an "OFAC Alert"
List of Country-related Sanctions
Appeal an OFAC designation or other listing
Other Government Sites
USA.gov
USAJOBS.gov
OPM.gov
MyMoney.gov
Data.gov
Footer
Privacy Policy
Google Privacy
Site Policies and Notices
Accessibility
