      "Redemption Amount" of each Note, unless
      previously redeemed in whole or in part or
      repurchased and cancelled, shall be the
      Prevailing Nominal Amount of such Note. In the
      event of a redemption after the commencement of
      insolvency or liquidation proceedings, the
      Redemption Amount of each Note shall be the
      Prevailing Nominal Amount at such time unless
      previously redeemed in whole or in part or
      repurchased and cancelled; the provision on
      subordination pursuant to § 2 remains unaffected
      by this.


(4)   Write-down.

(a)   Upon the occurrence of a Trigger Event, the
      Prevailing Nominal Amount of each Note shall be
      reduced by the amount of the relevant write-
      down.

      A "Trigger Event" occurs if, at any time, the
      common equity tier 1 capital ratio pursuant to
      Article 92(1)(a) CRR or any successor provision
      thereto, determined on a consolidated basis (the
      "Common Equity Tier 1 Capital Ratio") falls
      below 5.125 per cent (the "Minimum CET1
      Ratio"). Whether a Trigger Event has occurred
      shall be determined by the Issuer, the competent
      authority or any agent appointed for such purpose
      by the competent authority.


      A Trigger Event may be determined at any time
      and may occur on more than one occasion.

      Upon the occurrence of a Trigger Event, a write-
      down shall be effected pro rata with all of the
      Issuer's other Additional Tier 1 instruments within
      the meaning of the CRR the terms of which
      provide for a write-down (whether permanent or
      temporary) or a conversion into common equity
      tier 1 instruments upon the occurrence of the
      Trigger Event. For such purpose, the total amount
      of the write-downs and conversions to be
      allocated pro rata shall be equal to the amount
      required to restore fully the Common Equity Tier
      1 Capital Ratio of the Issuer to the Minimum CET1
      Ratio but shall not exceed the sum of the nominal
      amounts of the relevant instruments outstanding
      at the time of occurrence of the Trigger Event.


      The sum of the write-downs to be effected with
      respect to the Notes shall be limited to the
      aggregate Prevailing Nominal Amount of the
      Notes at the time of occurrence of the relevant
      Trigger Event.



      Upon the occurrence of a Trigger Event, the
      Issuer shall:

      (i)    inform the competent authority that is
             responsible for the Issuer and, in
             accordance with § 11, the Holders of the
             Notes without undue delay about the


                                                            52
             occurrence of such Trigger Event and the
             fact that a write-down will have to be
             effected, and

      (ii)   determine the write-down to be effected
             and the resultant new Prevailing Nominal
             Amount without undue delay, but not later
             than within one month (unless the
             competent authority of the Issuer shortens
             such period), and notify such write-down
             together with the new Prevailing Nominal
             Amount (i) to the competent authority, (ii)
             to the Holders of the Notes in accordance
             with § 11, (iii) to the Calculation Agent and
             the Paying Agent and (iv), if required by
             the rules of any stock exchange on which
             the Notes are listed from time to time at the
             request of the Issuer, to such stock
             exchange.

      The write-down shall be deemed to be effected at
      the time when the notices pursuant to (a)(i) and
      (a)(ii) are given and the Prevailing Nominal
      Amount of each Note shall be deemed to be
      reduced at such time in the amount as specified
      in the notice. Any failure to give notices pursuant
      to (a)(i) and/or (a)(ii) will not affect the
      effectiveness of, or otherwise invalidate, any
      write-down. A notice which has not been given
      shall be given without undue delay. If and to the
      extent that the write-down or conversion of any
      other additional tier 1 instrument of the Issuer is
      not effective for any reason, (i) the ineffectiveness
      of any such write-down or conversion shall not
      prejudice the requirement to effect a write-down
      of the Notes and (ii) the ineffective write-down or
      conversion shall not be taken into account in
      determining the write-down amount of the Notes.

(b)   After a write-down has been effected, the
      Prevailing Nominal Amount of each Note, unless
      previously redeemed or repurchased and
      cancelled, may be written up in accordance with
      the following provisions of § 5(4)(b) in each of the
      financial years of the Issuer subsequent to the
      occurrence of such write-down until the full Initial
      Nominal Amount has been reached, to the extent
      that     a     corresponding         annual    profit
      (Jahresüberschuss) is recorded on the basis of
      the unconsolidated annual financial statements of
      the Issuer prepared in accordance with German
      commercial law (the "Annual Profit") and the
      write-up will not give rise to or increase an annual
      loss (Jahresfehlbetrag). The write-up will occur
      with effect as of the Interest Payment Date
      (including) immediately following the financial
      year of the Issuer for which the abovementioned
      Annual Profit was determined.

      The write-up shall be effected pari passu with
      write-ups of other additional tier 1 instruments
      within the meaning of the CRR, unless this would
      cause the Issuer to be in breach with any statutory
      or regulatory obligations.


      Subject to the conditions (i) to (v) below, it shall
      be at the discretion of the Issuer to effect a write-
      up. In particular, the Issuer may effect a write-up

                                                              53
only in part or effect no write-up at all even if a
corresponding Annual Profit is recorded and the
conditions (i) to (v) are fulfilled.


(i)    To the extent that the Annual Profit
       determined or to be determined is to be
       used for a write-up of the Notes (i.e. a
       write-up of the nominal amount and of the
       Redemption Amount) and of other
       additional tier 1 instruments within the
       meaning of the CRR, the terms of which
       provide for a similar Trigger Event (also if
       such terms provide for a different common
       equity tier 1 capital ratio as trigger), and is
       available in accordance with (ii) and (iii)
       below, such write-up shall be effected pro
       rata in proportion to the initial nominal
       amounts of the instruments.


(ii)   The maximum total amount that may be
       used for a write-up of the Notes and of
       other AT1 Instruments that have been
       written down and for the payment of
       interest and other Distributions on AT1
       Instruments that have been written down
       shall be calculated, subject to the
       regulatory technical standards applicable
       at the time when the write-up is effected,
       in accordance with the following formula:




                          J×S
                     H=
                           T1

       'H' means the maximum amount available
       for the write-up of, and Distributions on,
       AT1 Instruments that have been written
       down;


       'J' means the Annual Profit determined or
       to be determined for the previous year;


       'S' means the sum of the initial nominal
       amounts of the AT1 Instruments that have
       been written down (i.e. before write-downs
       due to a Trigger Event are effected);



       'T1' means the amount of the tier 1 capital
       of the Issuer immediately before the write-
       up is effected.

       The maximum amount 'H' shall be
       determined in accordance with the
       European Banking Authority's regulatory
       technical standards as applicable from
       time to time. The maximum amount 'H'
       shall be determined by the Issuer in
       accordance with the requirements
       applicable at the time of determination,


                                                         54
