11. For transactions in a complex product without recommendation or solicitation executed
under a Streamlined Approach
11.1 Subject to the provision of offering documents to the SPI, intermediaries are not
required to perform product due diligence for investment products falling within the
Product Categories specified by the SPI. For bonds, where offering documents are not
provided to the SPI, intermediaries should prepare and provide their own summaries of
the key terms and features of the investment product 2; or provide to the SPI sufficient
information on the key terms and features of the investment product based on
information available from reliable public domain or data providers. 3
11.2 Intermediaries are not required to match SPI’s risk tolerance level, investment
objectives and investment horizon with Eligible Investment Transactions.
11.3 Intermediaries are not required to assess SPI’s knowledge and experience, and
concentration risk in Eligible Investment Transactions.
11.4 Intermediaries are not required to provide product explanation, except upon request
and/or any material queries being raised by the SPI. Intermediaries should provide SPI
with offering documents (where applicable), which could be done by sending a
hyperlink to relevant documents, or as attachments via electronic means (eg, email).
11.5 Intermediaries could provide warning statements in relation to the distribution of a
complex product on an annual basis instead of a transaction-by-transaction basis.
(D) Application of the Streamlined Approach
12. SPI assessment
12.1 An intermediary should apply the Streamlined Approach when dealing with an SPI only
if the intermediary is reasonably satisfied that the SPI has the degree of sophistication
to understand and take on the risks arising from a Streamlined Approach by meeting
the qualifying criteria (ie, financial situation, knowledge or experience and investment
objectives) set out in section (A) above.
12.2 The above assessment should be in writing. Records of all relevant information and
documents obtained in the assessment should be kept by the intermediary so as to
demonstrate the basis of the assessment.
12.3 Intermediaries should also maintain records of all correspondences with the SPI to
support the choice of Product Categories and the setting of a Streamlining Threshold
by the SPI.

2

Intermediaries should refer to the prevailing guidance issued by the SFC in the form of frequently asked questions on
23 December 2020 in relation to performing product due diligence and disclosing product information for the sale of
complex products on an unsolicited basis.
3
Intermediaries may provide the key terms and features of the investment product to SPI using written, verbal or a
combination of both types of communications with records maintained.
Page 5 of 7

