Appendix

Examples of acceptable authentication methods to reduce and mitigate
hacking risks associated with phishing attacks
(A) Passkey
1.

Passkeys 1 are a password-less authentication method that internet brokers and VASPs
may adopt to strengthen client login security.

2.

Passkey authentication is based on public-key cryptography. When a passkey is
created, the passkey is stored in the client’s device, hardware security key 2 or passkey
manager 3, while the corresponding public key is stored and used by the internet brokers
and VASPs for verifying client logins. This design reduces the risks associated with
stolen client passwords, intercepted OTPs, and other credential-based account takeover
attacks.

3.

Furthermore, passkeys are designed to be phishing resistant, as they are linked to the
genuine website or application for which they were created and can only be used in
connection with that specific website or application. If a client is redirected to a
fraudulent website, his/her passkey could not be used to authenticate that site, thereby
preventing unauthorised account access through phishing attacks.

Expected standards for passkey implementation
Internet brokers and VASPs may implement passkey solutions provided by third-party
providers or develop their own passkey solutions. In both cases, the solutions should be
subject to appropriate certification, ie, FIDO certification.
Internet brokers and VASPs should:
(a) ensure that passkey registration and setup are subject to strong identity verification.
Any additional passkeys for the same client’s internet trading account should only be
created after authentication and authorisation using an existing registered passkey or
other robust verification controls.
Illustrative scenarios on the passkey set up procedures for different types of clients
are set out below:

1
2

3

For further information on passkeys and FIDO authentication, please refer to the materials published by the
FIDO Alliance at https://fidoalliance.org/passkeys/.
Passkeys can be stored in hardware security keys, which are physical devices, such as Universal Serial Bus
(USB), Near Field Communication (NFC), or Bluetooth-enabled security keys, where the passkey is stored
directly on the device itself and does not synchronise across devices. They use FIDO2/WebAuthn protocols to
retain the cryptographic credentials on the hardware itself, thereby reducing the risk of remote interception
and providing stronger protection against phishing and credential theft.
Passkeys can be stored in passkey managers tied to the user’s account in a platform ecosystem such as
Apple, Google, or Microsoft. These passkeys can be synchronised and used across trusted devices within the
same ecosystem, such as Apple iCloud Keychain, Google Password Manager, and Microsoft Password
Manager. This arrangement allows users to sign in across multiple devices while continuing to benefit from
stronger protection against phishing.

54/F, One Island East, 18 Westlands Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong
香港鰂魚涌華蘭路 18 號港島東中心 54 樓
+852 2231 1222

www.sfc.hk

Page 1 of 4

