FOURTH SUPPLEMENT DATED 6 JUNE 2011 TO THE PROSPECTUS DATED 3 NOVEMBER 2010



                                BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                                      (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                          (acting through its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch
                                    or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch)

                                                           and
                                              BES Finance Ltd.
                               (incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands)

                                unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by
                                BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                                     (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                                           (acting through its London branch)



                   €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme
This Supplement (the "Supplement") to the Prospectus (the "Prospectus") dated 3 November 2010 (as
supplemented by supplements dated 15 November 2010, 3 March 2011 and 19 April 2011) constitutes a
supplement to the base prospectus for the purposes of article 13 of Part II of the Luxembourg Act dated 10
July 2005 relating to prospectuses for securities (the "Prospectus Act") and is prepared in connection with
the €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme (the "Programme") established by Banco
Espírito Santo, S.A. (the "Bank" or "BES") and BES Finance Ltd. ("BES Finance"). Terms defined in the
Prospectus have the same meaning when used in this Supplement.

This Supplement is supplemental to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Prospectus issued by the
Bank and BES Finance.

The purpose of this Supplement is: (a) to amend the risk factors section of the prospectus; (b) to incorporate
by reference the Bank's auditors' report and audited consolidated annual financial statements for the financial
year ended 31 December, 2010 as set out in the 2010 Annual Report (the "Bank's 2010 accounts"), the
Bank's unaudited consolidated interim financial statements for the three months ended 31 March, 2011 as set
out in the press release dated 2 May, 2011 (the "unaudited March 2011 accounts") and BES Finance
auditors’ report and audited annual financial statements for the financial year ended 31 December, 2010 as
set out in BES Finance’s Financial Statements and Notes to the Financial Statements for the years ended 31
December, 2010 and 2009 (the “BES Finance 2010 accounts”); and (c) to provide information regarding
certain recent developments.

Each of the Bank and BES Finance accepts responsibility for the information contained in this Supplement.
To the best of the knowledge of each of the Bank and BES Finance (who have taken all reasonable care to
ensure that such is the case) the information contained in this Supplement is in accordance with the facts and
does not omit anything likely to affect the import of such information.


1.      Risk Factors


In the section “RISK FACTORS” starting on page 15 of the Prospectus dated 3 November 2010, paragraph
1.3 the headings “Economic environment” shall be amended by the insertion of six new paragraphs between
the current first and last paragraphs, with the following wording:


                                                                                                             1
“In relation to the Portuguese market environment, the Portuguese Government has recently decided to seek
help from the EU rescue fund, which is likely result in an agreement for a financial assistance program
between Portugal, the European Union (European Financial Stabilisation Fund) and the International
Monetary Fund (IMF).

The context which triggered the above referred need for financial assistance is, to a certain extent, similar to
that of both Ireland and Greece in 2010. Portuguese structural imbalances - namely the high budget deficit,
the high private and public debt, the lack of competitiveness of the Portuguese economy and its respective
reputation problems - affected the country’s ability to refinance its debt or at least resulted in a deterioration
of the refinancing conditions, including costs, the sustainability of the public debt dynamics being now
questioned.

Any external support will certainly attach strict conditions, namely on the conduct of domestic economic
policy, with implications on the evolution of economic activity, being reasonable to estimate a negative
impact on the banking and the financial system in general.

The external intervention may involve a reorganization of Portuguese banks at risk of erosion of their deposit
base, which may negatively impact the financing needs of banks, although this intervention may
simultaneously provide conditions to ensure the banks receive regular funding during the external financial
assistance period. However, the funding requirements originally anticipated (and that should be complied
with by the time the financial assistance program is finally agreed with the Portuguese Government) may not
be enough. The external assistance also implies additional risks that relate to the possibility of banks being
required to comply with certain levels of regulatory capital ratios and eventually with a need for
recapitalization. In addition, there may be the difficulties in resuming the market’s financing when the market
assistance program has finished.”

In March 2011 Standard & Poor’s downgraded the rating of the Republic of Portugal to “BBB-”; in April
2011 Moody’s downgraded the rating of the Republic of Portugal to “Baa1”; and in April 2011 Fitch
downgraded the rating of the Republic of Portugal to “BBB-”.

In the future the rating of the Republic of Portugal may be downgraded again in the event of a more drastic
deterioration in public finances resulting from poorer performance in economic activity or from measures
proposed by the Government being perceived as insufficient. Accordingly, an adverse impact on the Republic
of Portugal may result in negative effects on Portuguese banks and companies in general and hence on their
financial results.



2.      Financial Statements

2.1     Auditor’s report and audited consolidated annual financial statements of the Bank for the financial
        year ended 31 December, 2010

Any information not listed in the cross reference list below but included in the Bank's 2010 accounts
incorporated by reference in this Supplement is given for information purposes only.

                                                                                                           Pages
 Auditor’s report and audited consolidated annual financial statements of
 the Bank for the financial year ended 31 December, 2010


 Balance Sheet                                                                                                 94

 Income Statement                                                                                              92

                                                                                                                2
 Cash Flow Statements                                                                                   96

 Accounting policies and explanatory notes                                                       97 to 187

 Auditors’ report                                                                               190 to 191


2.2    Auditor’s report and audited annual financial statements of BES Finance for the financial year ended
       31 December, 2010, as set out in BES Finance’s Financial Statements and Notes to the Financial
       Statements for the years ended 31 December, 2010 and 2009.

Any information not listed in the cross reference list below but included in BES Finance 2010 accounts
incorporated by reference in this Supplement is given for information purposes only.

                                                                                                      Pages
 Auditor’s report and audited annual financial statements of BES Finance
 for the financial year ended 31 December, 2010


 Balance Sheet                                                                                           4

 Income Statement                                                                                        2

 Cash Flow Statements                                                                                    6

 Accounting policies and explanatory notes                                                          7 to 50

 Auditors’ report                                                                                 51 to 52



2.3    Unaudited consolidated interim financial statements of the Bank for the three months ended 31
       March, 2011

       On 2 May, 2011 the Bank issued a press release disclosing its unaudited March 2011 accounts.


Any information not listed in the cross reference list below but included in the unaudited March 2011
accounts incorporated by reference in this Supplement is given for information purposes only.
                                                                                                Pages
 Unaudited consolidated interim financial statements of the bank for the
 three months ended 31 March, 2011


 Balance Sheet                                                                                          36

 Income Statement                                                                                       37



3.     Recent Developments

3.1    Ratings
                                                                                                         3
        On 19 April 2011, BES announced that Rating Agency DBRS, Inc.(“DBRS”) had initiated its
        coverage on BES, assigning the following ratings:

                Senior Long-term Debt & Deposit rating: “A (low)” / Outlook “Negative”
                Short-term Debt & Deposit rating “R-1 (low)”/ Outlook “Stable”

        DBRS Ratings Limited, DBRS' EU legal entity based in London, submitted its application for
        registration under the EU CRA Regulation in line with the requirements for systemically important
        credit rating agencies by September 7, 2011. The application also includes endorsed ratings for
        DBRS, Inc. (US) and DBRS Limited (Canada). Similar to its global peers, DBRS' application is still
        being reviewed. At this date, DBRS nor its global peers are registered in the EU.
        DBRS, Inc. and DBRS Limited are recognized external credit assessment institutions (ECAIs) since
        2007. As existing ECAIs, such ratings can be used for EU regulatory purposes unless and until
        otherwise notified.



3.2     Banco Espírito Santo agreed on the sale of stake in Banco Bradesco

        On 28 April 2011, BES announced that pursuant to an agreement between BES funds managed by
        ESAF – Sociedade Gestora de Fundos de Investimento Mobiliários, S.A. and Cidade de Deus
        Companhia Comercial de Participações (“Cidade de Deus”), BES agreed with Cidade de Deus to sell
        ca. 78 million ordinary shares representing 4.1% of the voting capital of Banco Bradesco, S.A. for an
        approximate amount of 2 billion Brazilian Reais. This transaction represents for Banco Espírito
        Santo a positive impact of ca. 60 bp in Tier I and ca. 30 bp in Core Tier I.


3.3     Change in the Board of Directors

        On 3 May, BES announced that Michel Joseph Paul Goutorbe renounced his position as a non
        executive Board Member, for which he was appointed in July 2007, and BES Board of Directors
        decided to co-opt Vincent Claude Paul Pacaud to fill the vacant position of nonexecutive Board
        Member until the end of the current mandate.



3.4     Rating Revision

        On 25 May, BES announced that Rating Agency DBRS downgraded BES long term rating from A
        (low) to BBB (high). The short-term debt and deposits rating was also downgraded from R-1 (low)
        to R-2 (high). This downgrade was announced following the downgrade of the Portuguese Republic
        of the same magnitude.




Copies of this Supplement and each document incorporated by reference in this Supplement can be obtained
from the registered office of the Bank and of BES Finance and from the specified office of the Paying Agent
for the time being in Luxembourg.

In addition, copies of this Supplement and each document incorporated by reference in this Supplement are
available for viewing at the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s website (www.bourse.lu).

                                                                                                            4
To the extent that there is any inconsistency between (a) any statement in this Supplement or any statement
incorporated by reference into the Prospectus by this Supplement and (b) any other statement in or
incorporated by reference in the Prospectus, the statements in (a) above will prevail.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement, there has been no significant change in the financial or trading position
of the Bank and the Group since 31 March 2011.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement, there has been no significant change in the financial or trading position
of BES Finance since 31 December 2010.

There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of BES Finance since 31 December, 2010.

There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of the Bank or the Group since 31 December,
2010.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement and any other supplements to the Prospectus, there has been no
significant new factor, material mistake or inaccuracy relating to information included in the Prospectus
since the publication of the Prospectus.

In accordance with article 13 paragraph 2 of Part II of the Prospectus Act, investors who, before this
supplement is published, have already agreed to purchase or subscribe for any Notes to be issued under the
Programme, have the right, exercisable within a time limit of two working days after the publication of this
supplement, to withdraw their acceptances.

Dated 6 June 2011




                                                                                                              5
