8.3

8.4

8.5

(C)

10.

Intermediaries are required to establish and maintain effective systems and controls to
ensure compliance with the Streamlining Threshold.

(a) Intermediaries should ensure the gross exposure arising from investment
transactions executed under the Streamlined Approach remains at or below the
Streamlining Threshold upon execution; or

(b) Intermediaries could devise designated accounts (or sub-accounts) to consolidate
Eligible Investment Transactions of the SPI executed under the Streamlined
Approach. In such circumstances, they should ensure the gross exposure arising
from all positions maintained in the designated account remains at or below the
Streamlining Threshold after receiving top-up or deposit of new fund into such
designated account. The amount or percentage of AUM with the intermediary
being allocated to the designated account should be discussed with the SPI at
least annually, or when new fund is added to the designated account.

Intermediaries should implement measures to detect outsize or material transactions
and issue warning statements to the SPI for these transactions.

Intermediaries should review compliance with the Streamlining Threshold at least on an
annual basis and alert the SPI where the gross exposure arising from investment
transactions executed under a Streamlined Approach and/or positions maintained in
the designated accounts have exceeded the Streamlining Threshold.

Streamlined Approach

Paragraph 10 (for transactions with recommendation or solicitation) and paragraph 11
(for transactions in a complex product without recommendation or solicitation) set out
the procedures that could be streamlined by intermediaries for compliance with
suitability obligations when dealing with SPls in Eligible Investment Transactions.

For transactions with recommendation or solicitation executed under a Streamlined
Approach

10.1 Intermediaries are not required to match SPI’s risk tolerance level, investment

objectives and investment horizon with Eligible Investment Transactions.

10.2 Intermediaries are not required to assess SPI’s knowledge and experience, and

concentration risk in Eligible Investment Transactions.

10.3 Intermediaries are not required to provide product explanation, except upon request

and/or any material queries being raised by the SPI. Intermediaries should provide SPI
with up-to-date product offering documents, which could be done by sending a
hyperlink to the offering documents or as attachments via electronic means (eg, email).

10.4 Intermediaries are not required to maintain records documenting the rationale

underlying investment recommendations made to SPI.

Page 4 of 7
