                                                                                        Debt Issuance Program Prospectus
                                                                                                        September 9, 2022
This document constitutes two base prospectuses for the purposes of Art. 8(1) of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of June 14, 2017 (as amended, the "Prospectus Regulation"): (i) the base prospectus of BASF
SE in respect of non-equity securities within the meaning of Art. 2(c) of the Prospectus Regulation, ("Non-Equity Securities")
and (ii) the base prospectus of BASF Finance Europe N.V. in respect of Non-Equity Securities (together, the "Debt Issuance
Program Prospectus" or the "Prospectus").




                                                       BASF SE
                                   (Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Federal Republic of Germany)
                                        as Issuer and, in respect of Notes issued by
                                          BASF Finance Europe N.V., as Guarantor
                                        BASF Finance Europe N.V.
                                                 (Arnhem, The Netherlands)
                                                         as Issuer
                                                EUR 20,000,000,000
                                               Debt Issuance Program
                                                       (the "Program")
The payments of all amounts due in respect of Notes issued by BASF Finance Europe N.V. will be unconditionally and
irrevocably guaranteed by BASF SE.
This Prospectus has been approved by the Luxembourg Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier (the
"Commission") as competent authority under the Prospectus Regulation. The Commission only approves this Prospectus as
meeting the standards of completeness, comprehensibility and consistency imposed by the Prospectus Regulation. Such
approval should not be considered as an endorsement of each issuer or of the quality of the Notes that are the subject of this
Prospectus. Investors should make their own assessment as to the suitability of investing in the Notes.
Application has been made to list Notes issued under the Program on the official list of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and
to trade Notes on the regulated market or on the professional segment of the regulated market "Bourse de Luxembourg". The
Luxembourg Stock Exchange's regulated market is a regulated market for the purposes of the Directive on markets in financial
instruments 2014/65/EU, as amended, (the "Regulated Market"). Notes issued under the Program may also not be listed at
all.
Each Issuer has requested the Commission in its capacity as competent authority under the Prospectus Regulation and the
Luxembourg act relating to prospectuses for securities dated July 16, 2019 (Loi du 16 juillet 2019 relative aux prospectus pour
valeurs mobilières et portant mise en œuvre du règlement (UE) 2017/1129 - the "Luxembourg Law") to provide the
competent authorities in the Federal Republic of Germany ("Germany"), the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Ireland and
The Netherlands with a certificate of approval attesting that the Prospectus has been drawn up in accordance with the
Prospectus Regulation ("Notification"). Each Issuer may request the Commission to provide competent authorities in
additional Member States within the European Economic Area with a Notification. By approving a prospectus, the Commission
shall give no undertaking as to the economic and financial soundness of the operation or the quality or solvency of each issuer
pursuant to Article 6(4) of the Luxembourg Law.
                                                           Arranger
                                                       Deutsche Bank

                                                           Dealers
  Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria,
                                                          Barclays                                BNP PARIBAS
               S.A.
            BofA Securities                               Citigroup                               Commerzbank
          Crédit Agricole CIB                           Credit Suisse                             Deutsche Bank
             DZ BANK AG                      Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE                              HSBC
                  ING                               IMI - Intesa Sanpaolo                           J.P. Morgan
  Landesbank Baden-Württemberg                              MUFG                                      Mizuho
            Morgan Stanley                            NatWest Markets                          RBC Capital Markets
 Santander Corporate & Investment                                                              Société Générale
                                                            SMBC
             Banking                                                                    Corporate & Investment Banking
        UBS Investment Bank                                                                          UniCredit
This Prospectus will be published in electronic form on the website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu) and
on the "investors" tab on the website of BASF Group (www.basf.com). This Prospectus is valid for a period of twelve months
after its approval. The validity ends upon expiration of September 9, 2023. There is no obligation to supplement the
Prospectus in the event of significant new factors, material mistakes or material inaccuracies when the Prospectus is
no longer valid.
                                                      2




                                 RESPONSIBILITY STATEMENT
BASF SE ("BASF" or the "Guarantor", together with its consolidated group companies, the "BASF
Group") with its registered office in Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Germany and BASF Finance Europe N.V.
("BASF Finance") with its registered office in Arnhem, The Netherlands (herein each also called an
"Issuer" and together the "Issuers") accept responsibility for the information given in this Prospectus and
for the information which will be contained in the Final Terms (as defined herein).
Each Issuer hereby declares that to the best of its knowledge the information contained in this Prospectus
for which it is responsible is, to the best of its knowledge, in accordance with the facts and that this
Prospectus makes no omission likely to affect its import.


                                                 NOTICE
This Prospectus should be read and understood in conjunction with any supplement hereto and with any
other documents incorporated herein by reference. Full information on the Issuers and any tranche of
Notes is only available on the basis of the combination of the Prospectus and the relevant Final Terms (as
defined herein).
Each Issuer has confirmed to the Dealers (as defined herein) that this Prospectus contains all information
which is material to an investor for making an informed assessment of the assets and liabilities, financial
position, profit and losses and prospects of the Issuers and the rights attaching to the Notes and the
reasons for the issuance and its impact on the Issuer and all information which is material in the context of
the Program and the issue and offering of the Notes thereunder; that the information contained herein with
respect to the Issuers and the Notes is accurate and complete in all material respects and is not
misleading; that any opinions and intentions expressed herein with respect to the Issuers and the Notes
are honestly held and based on reasonable assumptions; that there are no other facts with respect to the
Issuers or the Notes, the omission of which would make this Prospectus as a whole or any of such
information or the expression of any such opinions or intentions misleading in any material respect; and
that the Issuers have made all reasonable enquiries to ascertain all facts material for the purposes
aforesaid.
Each Issuer and the Guarantor has undertaken with the Dealers (i) to supplement this Prospectus or
publish a new Prospectus in the event of any significant new factor, material mistake or material
inaccuracy relating to the information included in this Prospectus in respect of Notes issued on the basis of
this Prospectus which is capable of affecting the assessment of the Notes and which arises or is noted
between the time when this Prospectus has been approved and the final closing of any tranche of Notes
offered to the public or, as the case may be, when trading of any tranche of Notes on a regulated market
begins, and (ii) to have such document approved by the Commission.
None of the Dealers makes any representation as to the suitability of any Notes issued under the
Programme the net proceeds of which (or an amount equal thereto) are intended to be used towards the
financing and/or refinancing of Eligible Projects (as defined below) to fulfil any environmental, social and/or
sustainability criteria required by any prospective investors. The Dealers have not undertaken, nor are they
responsible for, any assessment or verification of the Eligible Projects and their impact, or monitoring of
the use of the net proceeds of any such Notes (or amounts equal thereto). Prospective investors should
refer to the Issuer's Green Finance Framework and the Third Party Opinion (each as defined herein), and
for the avoidance of doubt, neither the Issuer's Green Finance Framework nor the Third Party Opinion, is
incorporated into, or forms part of, this Prospectus.
No person has been authorized to give any information which is not contained in or not consistent with this
Prospectus or any other document entered into in relation to the Program or any information supplied by
any Issuer or any other information in the public domain and, if given or made, such information must not
be relied upon as having been authorized by the Issuers, the Dealers or any of them.
Neither the Arranger (as defined herein) nor any Dealer nor any other person mentioned in this
Prospectus, excluding the Issuers, is responsible for the information contained in this Prospectus or any
supplement hereto, or any Final Terms or any document incorporated herein by reference, and
accordingly, and to the extent permitted by the laws of any relevant jurisdiction, none of these persons
accepts any responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the information contained in any of these
documents. This Prospectus is valid for 12 months after its approval and this Prospectus and any
supplement hereto as well as any Final Terms reflect the status as of their respective dates of issue. The
delivery of this Prospectus or any Final Terms and the offering, sale or delivery of any Notes may not be
taken as an implication that the information contained in such documents is accurate and complete
                                                       3


subsequent to their respective dates of issue or that there has been no adverse change in the financial
situation of the Issuers since such date or that any other information supplied in connection with the
Program is accurate at any time subsequent to the date on which it is supplied or, if different, the date
indicated in the document containing the same.
The distribution of this Prospectus and any Final Terms and the offering, sale and delivery of Notes in
certain jurisdictions may be restricted by law. Persons into whose possession this Prospectus or any Final
Terms come are required to inform themselves about and observe any such restrictions. For a description
of the restrictions applicable in the United States of America, the European Economic Area in general, the
United Kingdom, Japan, Republic of Italy, Switzerland, Republic of Singapore and Canada see "Selling
Restrictions". In particular, the Notes have not been and will not be registered under the United States
Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act") and are subject to tax law requirements of the
United States of America; subject to certain exceptions, Notes may not be offered, sold or delivered within
the United States of America or to U.S. persons.
MIFID II PRODUCT GOVERNANCE / TARGET MARKET – The Final Terms in respect of any Notes may
include a legend entitled "MiFID II Product Governance" which will outline the target market assessment
in respect of the Notes and which channels for distribution of the Notes are appropriate. Any person
subsequently offering, selling or recommending the Notes (a "distributor") should take into consideration
the target market assessment; however, a distributor subject to Directive 2014/65/EU (as amended,
"MiFID II") is responsible for undertaking its own target market assessment in respect of the Notes (by
either adopting or refining the target market assessment) and determining appropriate distribution
channels.
UK MIFIR PRODUCT GOVERNANCE / TARGET MARKET – The Final Terms in respect of any Notes
may include a legend entitled "UK MiFIR Product Governance" which will outline the target market
assessment in respect of the Notes and which channels for distribution of the Notes are appropriate. Any
person subsequently offering, selling or recommending the Notes (a "distributor") should take into
consideration the target market assessment; however, a distributor subject to the FCA Handbook Product
Intervention and Product Governance Sourcebook (the "UK MiFIR Product Governance Rules") is
responsible for undertaking its own target market assessment in respect of the Notes (by either adopting
or refining the target market assessment) and determining appropriate distribution channels.
A determination will be made in relation to each issue about whether, for the purpose of the MiFID Product
Governance rules under EU Delegated Directive 2017/593 (the "MiFID Product Governance Rules"), or
the UK MiFIR Governance Rules, any Dealer subscribing for any Notes is a manufacturer in respect of
such Notes, but otherwise neither the Arranger nor the Dealers nor any of their respective affiliates will be
a manufacturer for the purpose of the MiFID Product Governance Rules or the UK MiFIR Product
Governance Rules.
PRIIPs / IMPORTANT – EEA RETAIL INVESTORS – If the Final Terms in respect of any Notes include a
legend entitled "PROHIBITION OF SALES TO EEA RETAIL INVESTORS", the Notes are not intended to
be offered, sold or otherwise made available to and should not be offered, sold or otherwise made
available to any retail investor in the European Economic Area ("EEA"). For these purposes, a retail
investor means a person who is one (or more) of: (i) a retail client as defined in point (11) of Article 4(1) of
MiFID II; or (ii) a customer within the meaning of Directive 2016/97/EU (as amended), where that customer
would not qualify as a professional client as defined in point (10) of Article 4(1) of MiFID II; or (iii) not a
qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus Regulation. Consequently no key information document
required by Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014 (as amended, the "PRIIPs Regulation") for offering or selling
the Notes or otherwise making them available to retail investors in the EEA has been prepared and
therefore offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available to any retail investor in the EEA
may be unlawful under the PRIIPs Regulation.
IMPORTANT – UK RETAIL INVESTORS – If the Final Terms in respect of any Notes includes a legend
entitled "PROHIBITION OF SALES TO UK RETAIL INVESTORS", the Notes are not intended to be
offered, sold or otherwise made available to and should not be offered, sold or otherwise made available
to any retail investor in the United Kingdom ("UK"). For these purposes, a retail investor means a person
who is one (or more) of: (i) a retail client, as defined in point (8) of Article 2 of Delegated Regulation (EU)
No 2017/565 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018
("EUWA"); or (ii) a customer within the meaning of the provisions of the Financial Services and Markets
Authority ("FSMA") and any rules or regulations made under the FSMA to implement Directive (EU)
2016/97, where that customer would not qualify as a professional client, as defined in point (8) of Article
2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the EUWA; or (iii) not a
qualified investor as defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 as it forms part of domestic law by
virtue of the EUWA. Consequently no key information document required by Regulation (EU) No
1286/2014 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the EUWA (the "UK PRIIPs Regulation") for
                                                      4


offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available to retail investors in the UK has been
prepared and therefore offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available to any retail
investor in the UK may be unlawful under the UK PRIIPs Regulation.
PRODUCT CLASSIFICATION REQUIREMENTS IN SINGAPORE - The Notes are prescribed capital
markets products (as defined in the Securities and Futures (Capital Markets Products) Regulations 2018)
and Excluded Investment Products (as defined in MAS Notice SFA 04-N12: Notice on the Sale of
Investment Products and MAS Notice FAA-N16: Notice on Recommendations on Investment Products).
NOTICE TO CANADIAN INVESTORS - This notice is directed only to purchasers that are resident in or
subject to the securities laws of British Columbia, Alberta or Ontario.
The Notes may be sold only to such purchasers that are purchasing, or deemed to be purchasing, as
principal that are accredited investors, as defined in National Instrument 45-106 Prospectus Exemptions or
subsection 73.3(1) of the Securities Act (Ontario), and are permitted clients, as defined in National
Instrument 31-103 Registration Requirements. Any resale of the Notes must be made in accordance with
an exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the prospectus requirements of applicable securities
laws.
Securities legislation in certain provinces or territories of Canada may provide a purchaser with remedies
for rescission or damages if this Prospectus (including any amendment or supplement hereto and/or any
Final Terms) contains a misrepresentation, provided that the remedies for rescission or damages are
exercised by the purchaser within the time limit prescribed by the securities legislation of the purchaser's
province or territory. The purchaser should refer to any applicable provisions of the securities legislation of
the purchaser's province or territory for particulars of these rights or consult with a legal advisor.
The language of the Prospectus is English. The German versions of the English language sets of Terms
and Conditions and Guarantee are shown in the Prospectus for additional information. As to form and
content, and all rights and obligations of the Holders (as defined herein) and the Issuer under the Notes to
be issued, German is the controlling legally binding language if so specified in the relevant Final Terms. In
respect of the Guarantee, the German language version is always controlling and legally binding as to
form and content, and all rights and obligations of the Holders and the Guarantor thereunder.
Each Dealer and/or each further financial intermediary subsequently reselling or finally placing
Notes issued under the Program is entitled to use the Prospectus as set out in "Consent to the Use
of the Prospectus" below.
This Prospectus may only be used for the purpose for which it has been published.
This Prospectus and any Final Terms may not be used for the purpose of an offer or solicitation by
anyone in any jurisdiction in which such offer or solicitation is not authorized or to any person to
whom it is unlawful to make such an offer or solicitation.
This Prospectus and any Final Terms do not constitute an offer or an invitation to subscribe for or
purchase any Notes.
Each potential investor in the Notes must determine the suitability of that investment in light of its
own circumstances and be aware of the risk that an investment in the Notes may not be suitable at
all times until maturity bearing in mind the following key aspects when assessing and reassessing
the suitability of the Notes which may change over time and could lead to the risk of non-
suitability. Each potential investor should:
(i)    have sufficient knowledge and experience to make a meaningful evaluation of the relevant
       Notes, the merits and risks of investing in the relevant Notes and the information contained or
       incorporated by reference in this Prospectus or any supplement hereto;
(ii)   have access to, and knowledge of, appropriate analytical tools to evaluate, in the context of its
       particular financial situation and the investment(s) it is considering, an investment in the
       Notes and the impact the Notes will have on its overall investment portfolio;
(iii) have sufficient financial resources and liquidity to bear all of the risks of an investment in the
      relevant Notes, including where principal or interest is payable in one or more currencies, or
      where the currency for principal or interest payments is different from the potential investor's
      currency;
(iv) understand thoroughly the terms of the relevant Notes and be familiar with the behavior of
     any relevant indices and financial markets; and
                                                      5


(v)   be able to evaluate (either alone or with the help of a financial adviser) possible scenarios for
      economic, interest rate and other factors that may affect its investment and its ability to bear
      the applicable risks.
In connection with the issue of any Tranche of Notes under the Program, the Dealer or Dealers (if
any) named as stabilization manager(s) in the applicable Final Terms (or persons acting on behalf
of a stabilization manager) may over-allot Notes or effect transactions with a view to supporting
the price of the Notes at a level higher than that which might otherwise prevail. However,
stabilization may not necessarily occur. Any stabilization action may begin on or after the date on
which adequate public disclosure of the terms of the offer of the relevant Tranche of Notes is made
and, if begun, may cease at any time, but it must end no later than the earlier of 30 days after the
Issue Date of the relevant Tranche of Notes and 60 days after the date of the allotment of the
relevant Tranche of Notes. Any stabilization action or over-allotment must be conducted by the
relevant stabilization manager(s) (or person(s) acting on behalf of any stabilization manager(s)) in
accordance with all applicable laws and rules.
The information on any website included in the Prospectus, except for the website www.bourse.lu in the
context of the documents incorporated by reference, do not form part of the Prospectus and have not been
scrutinised or approved by the Commission.
Amounts payable under Floating Rate Notes are calculated by reference to EURIBOR (Euro Interbank
Offered Rate) which is provided by the European Money Markets Institute (EMMI). As at the date of this
Prospectus, EMMI appears on the register of administrators and benchmarks established and maintained
by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) pursuant to Article 36 of the Benchmarks
Regulation (Regulation (EU) 2016/1011) ("BMR").


                             FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This Prospectus contains certain forward-looking statements. A forward-looking statement is a statement
that does not relate to historical facts and events. They are based on analyses or forecasts of future
results and estimates of amounts not yet determinable or foreseeable. These forward-looking statements
are identified by the use of terms and phrases such as "anticipate", "believe", "could", "estimate", "expect",
"intend", "may", "plan", "predict", "project", "will" and similar terms and phrases, including references and
assumptions. This applies, in particular, to statements in this Prospectus containing information on future
earning capacity, plans and expectations regarding BASF Group's business and management, its growth
and profitability, and general economic and regulatory conditions and other factors that affect it.

Forward-looking statements in this Prospectus are based on current estimates and assumptions that the
Issuers make to the best of their present knowledge. These forward-looking statements are subject to
risks, uncertainties and other factors which could cause actual results, including BASF Group's financial
condition and results of operations, to differ materially from and be worse than results that have expressly
or implicitly been assumed or described in these forward-looking statements. BASF Group's business is
also subject to a number of risks and uncertainties that could cause a forward-looking statement, estimate
or prediction in this Prospectus to become inaccurate. Accordingly, investors are strongly advised to read
the following sections of this Prospectus: "Risk Factors", "BASF SE as Issuer and Guarantor" and "BASF
Finance Europe N.V. as Issuer". These sections include more detailed descriptions of factors that might
have an impact on BASF Group's business and the markets in which it operates.
In light of these risks, uncertainties and assumptions, future events described in this Prospectus may not
occur. In addition, neither the Issuers nor the Dealers assume any obligation, except as required by law, to
update any forward-looking statement or to conform these forward-looking statements to actual events or
developments.
                                                                        6


                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS
                                                                                                                                               Page


General Description of the Program ................................................................................................. 7
General ............................................................................................................................................. 7
Issue Procedures ............................................................................................................................. 8
Risk Factors.................................................................................................................................... 10
Risk Factors regarding BASF SE and BASF Group ...................................................................... 10
Risk Factors regarding BASF Finance Europe N.V. ...................................................................... 17
Risk Factors regarding the Notes ................................................................................................... 17
Consent to the use of the Prospectus ............................................................................................ 24
BASF SE as Issuer and Guarantor ................................................................................................ 25
BASF Finance Europe N.V. as Issuer ............................................................................................ 62
Terms and Conditions of the Notes (English Language Version) .................................................. 65
OPTION I – Terms and Conditions that apply to Notes with fixed interest rates ........................... 65
OPTION II – Terms and Conditions that apply to Notes with floating interest rates ...................... 89
Terms and Conditions of the Notes (German Language Version) ............................................... 107
OPTION I – Anleihebedingungen für Schuldverschreibungen mit fester Verzinsung .................. 108
OPTION II – Anleihebedingungen für Schuldverschreibungen mit variabler Verzinsung ............ 134
Guarantee (German Language Version) ...................................................................................... 155
Guarantee (English Translation) .................................................................................................. 158
Form of Final Terms ..................................................................................................................... 162
Description of Rules Regarding Resolutions of Holders .............................................................. 177
Use of Proceeds ........................................................................................................................... 179
Taxation Warning ......................................................................................................................... 180
Selling Restrictions ....................................................................................................................... 181
General Information ...................................................................................................................... 187
Interests of Natural and Legal Persons involved in the Issue/Offer ............................................. 187
Authorization................................................................................................................................. 187
Listing and Admission to Trading ................................................................................................. 187
Clearing Systems ......................................................................................................................... 188
Documents Available .................................................................................................................... 188
Documents Incorporated by Reference ....................................................................................... 189
Documents incorporated by Reference ........................................................................................ 189
Cross-reference list of Documents incorporated by Reference ................................................... 189
Availability of Documents ............................................................................................................. 191
Names and Addresses ................................................................................................................. 193
                                                     7


                       GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAM

I. General
Under this EUR 20,000,000,000 Debt Issuance Program, BASF and BASF Finance may from time to time
issue notes (the "Notes") to one or more of the following Dealers: Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A.,
Banco Santander, S.A., Barclays Bank Ireland PLC, BNP Paribas, BofA Securities Europe SA, Citigroup
Global Markets Europe AG, Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft, Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment
Bank, Credit Suisse Bank (Europe), S.A., Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, DZ BANK AG Deutsche
Zentral-Genossenschaftsbank, Frankfurt am Main, Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE, HSBC Continental
Europe, ING Bank N.V., Intesa Sanpaolo S.p.A., J.P. Morgan SE, Landesbank Baden-Württemberg,
Mizuho Securities Europe GmbH, Morgan Stanley Europe SE, MUFG Securities EMEA plc, MUFG
Securities (Europe) N.V., NatWest Markets N.V., RBC Europe Limited, RBC Capital Markets (Europe)
GmbH, SMBC Bank EU AG, Société Générale, UBS AG London Branch, UniCredit Bank AG and any
additional Dealer appointed under the Program from time to time by the Issuer(s), which appointment may
be for a specific issue or on an ongoing basis (together, the "Dealers").
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft acts as arranger in respect of the Program (the "Arranger").
The maximum aggregate principal amount of the Notes outstanding at any one time under the Program
will not exceed EUR 20,000,000,000 (or its equivalent in any other currency). The Issuers may increase
the amount of the Program in accordance with the terms of the Dealer Agreement (as defined herein) from
time to time.
Notes issued by BASF Finance will have the benefit of a Guarantee (the "Guarantee") given by BASF.
The Guarantee constitutes an irrevocable, unsecured and unsubordinated obligation of the Guarantor
ranking pari passu with all other unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Guarantor.
Notes may be issued on a continuing basis to one or more of the Dealers. Notes may be distributed by
way of public offer or private placements and, in each case, on a syndicated or non-syndicated basis. The
method of distribution of each tranche ("Tranche") will be stated in the relevant final terms (the "Final
Terms"). The Notes may be offered to qualified and non-qualified investors, including with the restrictions
specified in the "PROHIBITION OF SALES TO EEA RETAIL INVESTORS" and "PROHIBITION OF
SALES TO UK RETAIL INVESTORS" legends set out on the cover page of the applicable Final Terms, if
any.
Notes will be issued in Tranches, each Tranche in itself consisting of Notes, which are identical in all
respects. One or more Tranches, which are expressed to be consolidated and forming a single series and
identical in all respects, but having different issue dates, interest commencement dates, issue prices and
dates for first interest payments may form a series ("Series") of Notes. Further Notes may be issued as
part of existing Series.
Notes will be issued in such denominations as may be agreed between the relevant Issuer and the
relevant Dealer(s) and as indicated in the applicable Final Terms save that the minimum denomination of
the Notes will be, if in euro, EUR 1,000, and, if in any currency other than euro, an amount in such other
currency at least to EUR 1,000 at the time of the issue of Notes. Subject to any applicable legal or
regulatory restrictions, and requirements of relevant central banks, Notes may be issued in euro or any
other currency.
Notes will be issued with a maturity of twelve months or more. The Notes will be freely transferable.
Notes may be issued at an issue price, which is at par or at a discount to, or premium over, par. If the
issue price is known as at the date of publication of the relevant Final Terms, it will be specified therein.
The issue price for Notes to be issued will be determined at the time of pricing on the basis of a yield
which will be determined on the basis of the orders of the investors which are received by the Dealers
during the offer period. Orders will specify a minimum yield and may only be confirmed at or above such
yield. The resulting yield will be used to determine an issue price, all to correspond to the yield.
The yield for Notes with fixed interest rates will be calculated by the use of the ICMA method, which
determines the effective interest rate of notes taking into account accrued interest on a daily basis.
The Risk Factors included into this Prospectus are limited to risks which are (i) specific to the BASF and
BASF Finance as Issuers and Guarantor, as the case may be, as well as the Notes, and (ii) are material
for taking an informed investment decision. They are presented in a limited number of categories
depending on their nature. In each category the most material risk factor is mentioned first.
                                                       8


Under this Prospectus a summary will only be drawn up in relation to an issue of Notes with a
denomination of less than EUR 100,000. Such an issue-specific summary will be annexed to the
applicable Final Terms.
Application has been made to the Commission, which is the Luxembourg competent authority for the
purpose of the Prospectus Regulation for its approval of this Prospectus.
Application has been made to the Luxembourg Stock Exchange for Notes issued under this Program to be
admitted to trading on the Regulated Market or on the professional segment of the Regulated Market of
the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and to be listed on the official list of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange.
Notes may further be issued under the Program, which will not be listed on any stock exchange.
Notes will be accepted for clearing through one or more Clearing Systems as specified in the applicable
Final Terms. These systems will comprise those operated by Clearstream Banking AG, Frankfurt am Main,
Clearstream Banking S.A., Luxembourg, Euroclear Bank SA/NV and CDS & Co., as nominee for CDS
Clearing and Depository Services Inc. Notes denominated in euro or, as the case may be, such other
currency recognized from time to time for the purposes of eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary
policy and intra-day credit operations by the Eurosystem are intended to be held in a manner, which would
allow Eurosystem eligibility. Therefore, the Notes will be deposited initially upon issue with in the case of (i)
a new global note either Clearstream Banking S.A., Luxembourg or Euroclear Bank SA/NV as common
safekeeper or, (ii) a classical global note Clearstream Banking AG, Frankfurt am Main. It does not
necessarily mean that the Notes will be recognized as eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy
and intra-day credit operations by the Eurosystem either upon issue or at any or all times during their life.
Such recognition will depend upon satisfaction of the Eurosystem eligibility criteria.
Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A. will act as Luxembourg Listing Agent and Deutsche Bank
Aktiengesellschaft will act as fiscal agent and paying agent (the "Fiscal Agent").


II. Issue Procedures

General
The relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer(s) will agree on the terms and conditions applicable to each
particular Tranche of Notes (the "Conditions"). The Conditions will be constituted by the relevant set of
Terms and Conditions of the Notes set forth below (the "Terms and Conditions") as further specified by
the Final Terms (the "Final Terms") as described below.


Options for sets of Terms and Conditions
A separate set of Terms and Conditions applies to each type of Notes, as set forth below. The Final Terms
provide for the relevant Issuer to choose between the following Options:
-   Option I – Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates (and Option I A, Option I B, Option I
    C, Option I D, Option I E, Option I F, Option I G, Option I H as well as Option I I as defined in
    "Documents incorporated by Reference"); and
-   Option II – Terms and Conditions for Notes with floating interest rates.
With respect to each type of Notes, the respective Option I A, Option I B, Option I C, Option I D, Option I
E, Option I F, Option I G, Option I H and Option I I are incorporated by reference into this Prospectus for
the purpose of a potential increase of Notes outstanding and originally issued prior to the date of this
Prospectus.


Documentation of the Conditions
The relevant Issuer may document the Conditions of an individual issue of Notes in either of the following
ways:
-   The Final Terms shall be completed as set out therein. The Final Terms shall determine which of the
    Option I or Option II, including certain further options contained therein, respectively, shall be
    applicable to the individual issue of Notes by replicating the relevant provisions and completing the
    relevant placeholders of the relevant set of Terms and Conditions as set out in the Prospectus in the
    Final Terms. The replicated and completed provisions of the set of Terms and Conditions alone shall
    constitute the Conditions, which will be attached to each global note representing the Notes of the
    relevant Tranche. This type of documentation of the Conditions will be required where the Notes are
                                                         9


    publicly offered, in whole or in part, or are to be initially distributed, in whole or in part, to non-qualified
    investors.
-   Alternatively, the Final Terms shall determine which of Option I or Option II and of the respective
    further options contained in each of Option I and Option II are applicable to the individual issue by
    referring to the relevant provisions of the relevant set of Terms and Conditions as set out in the
    Prospectus only. The Final Terms will specify that the provisions of the Final Terms and the relevant
    set of Terms and Conditions as set out in the Prospectus, taken together, shall constitute the
    Conditions. Each global note representing a particular Tranche of Notes will have the Final Terms and
    the relevant set of Terms and Conditions as set out in the Prospectus attached.


Determination of Options / Completion of Placeholders
The Final Terms shall determine which of the Option I or Option II shall be applicable to the individual
issue of Notes. Each of the sets of Terms and Conditions of Option I or Option II contains also certain
further options (characterized by indicating the respective optional provision through instructions and
explanatory notes set out either on the left of or in square brackets within the text of the relevant set of
Terms and Conditions as set out in the Prospectus) as well as placeholders (characterized by square
brackets which include the relevant items) which will be determined by the Final Terms as follows:
Determination of Options
The relevant Issuer will determine which options will be applicable to the individual issue either by
replicating the relevant provisions in the Final Terms or by reference of the Final Terms to the respective
sections of the relevant set of Terms and Conditions as set out in the Prospectus. If the Final Terms do not
refer to an alternative or optional provision or such alternative or optional provision is not replicated therein
it shall be deemed to be deleted from the Conditions.
Completion of Placeholders
The Final Terms will specify the information with which the placeholders in the relevant set of Terms and
Conditions will be completed. In the case the provisions of the Final Terms and the relevant set of Terms
and Conditions, taken together, shall constitute the Conditions the relevant set of Terms and Conditions
shall be deemed to be completed by the information contained in the Final Terms as if such information
were inserted in the placeholders of such provisions.
All instructions and explanatory notes and text set out in square brackets in the relevant set of Terms and
Conditions and any footnotes and explanatory text in the Final Terms will be deemed to be deleted from
the Conditions.


Controlling Language
As to the controlling language of the respective Conditions, the following applies:
-   In the case of Notes (i) publicly offered, in whole or in part, in the Federal Republic of Germany, or (ii)
    initially distributed, in whole or in part, to non-qualified investors in the Federal Republic of Germany,
    German will be the controlling language. If, in the event of such public offer or distribution to non-
    qualified investors, however, English is chosen as the controlling language, a German language
    translation of the Conditions will be available from the principal offices of the Fiscal Agent and BASF,
    as specified on the back cover of this Prospectus.
-   In other cases the relevant Issuer will elect either German or English to be the controlling language.
                                                     10


                                           RISK FACTORS
The following is a description of material risks that are specific to BASF and BASF Finance and/or
may affect their respective ability to fulfil their respective obligations under the Notes and the
Guarantee and that are material to the Notes issued under the Program in order to assess the
market risk associated with these Notes. Prospective investors should consider these risk factors
before deciding whether to purchase Notes issued under the Program.
Prospective investors should consider all information provided in this Prospectus and consult
with their own professional advisers (including their financial, accounting, legal and tax advisers)
if they consider it necessary. In addition, investors should be aware that the risks described might
combine and thus intensify one another.




                      RISK FACTORS REGARDING BASF SE AND BASF GROUP


The following descriptions of the risk factors and their occurrence within a risk category with the most
material risk factor presented first in each category should be understood as description of residual risks,
i.e. of the remaining risks following all counter measures taken in order to avoid such risks or limit their
adverse effects.
    The risk factors regarding the Issuer and the Guarantor are presented in the following categories
depending on their nature with the most material risk factor presented first in each category:
1.   Risks related to the issuer's and guarantor's business activities and industry
2.   Risks related to the issuer's and guarantor's financial situation
3.   Legal and regulatory risks
4.   Internal control risks
5.   Environmental, social and governance risks


1.   Risks related to the issuer's and guarantor's business activities and industry
Margin risks
Margin risks for BASF Group result from a decline in margins in particular in the Chemicals and Materials
segment. Further increases in energy and raw material prices in particular, new capacities or raw materials
shortages could also increase margin pressure on a number of products and value chains. For example,
some of BASF Group's divisions are exposed to strong fluctuations in raw material prices. These result
primarily from raw materials (for example naphtha, propylene, benzene, lauric oils, cyclohexane, methanol,
natural gas, butadiene, Liquefied Petroleum Gas condensate and ammonia) as well as from precious
metals. This would have a negative effect on BASF Group's EBIT. Crude oil and naphtha as the main raw
materials form the basis for many of BASF Group's value chains. The year's average oil price for Brent
crude was around $71 per barrel in 2021, compared with $42 per barrel in the previous year. The price of
oil averaged $107 per barrel (Brent crude) in the first half of 2022. The current forecast for the average
annual oil price (Brent crude) in 2022 is $110 per barrel.
Market growth risks
BASF Group is dependent on the economic environment and cyclical trends in the world economy and
may be adversely affected by any downturn in regional or worldwide economies, market crises as well as
prolonged periods of instability. There is a considerable correlation between economic development and
trade flows and, consequently, economic downturns and phases of prolonged instability often coincide with
a decline in trade volumes. The financial position of BASF Group's segments are affected by such
cyclicality and migration of various industries in which they operate, including the automotive, electrical,
electronics and construction industries.
Current developments, mainly driven by the war in Ukraine and its impact on energy and raw material
prices and availability, especially in Europe, pose a risk to the economy. In particular, risks could arise
from production stoppages at major European sites as a result of further restrictions to European gas
supplies from Russia. Higher inflation rates for manufacturer and consumer prices also pose a risk to the
economy and can have a considerable impact on global demand for intermediate goods for industrial
production and demand for investment goods. Central banks might react to rising inflation rates with a
                                                       11


significant tightening of monetary policy, which could have a braking effect on the economy and may
dampen consumption.
Additional macroeconomic risks result from the escalation of other geopolitical conflicts and a renewed
intensification of the trade conflict between the United States and China. With a share of more than 45%,
China is already the largest chemical market and drives the growth of global chemical production. A
slowdown of the Chinese economy would not only have a considerable impact on its chemical market but
also on the overall demand for intermediate goods for industrial production as well as investment goods.
This would further have an effect on emerging markets that export raw materials as well as on advanced
economies that specialize in technological goods. BASF Group might be impacted not only by decreased
demand in Chinese markets and in markets dependent on or linked to the Chinese economy but also by
the general deceleration of the worldwide macroeconomic development.
The development of demand in BASF Group's sales markets represents one of the most important
sources of risks. In particular, the sales volumes of BASF Group's crop protection products are subject to
the agricultural sector's dependency on weather conditions. Adverse weather conditions in a particular
growing region could materially negatively affect the results of operations of BASF Group's crop protection
business. Demand for crop protection products is further influenced by the agricultural policies of
governments and multinational organizations. Risks to the global economy and thus adverse impacts on
BASF Group's performance may also arise due to an escalation of geopolitical or trade conflicts, an
increase of tariff and non-tariff trade barriers as well as an increased tendency toward protectionism.
Furthermore, BASF Group's business is exposed to economic risks due to the international nature of its
business. Some of the countries in which BASF Group manufactures or offers services or into which it
exports are subject to reduced economic, political, social or legal stability. Potential risks BASF Group
might encounter in different countries include in particular the nationalization of assets, legal risks, the
prohibition of capital transfers, war, terrorist attacks and other unrest. There could also be an indirect
negative impact on BASF Group's business outside of a region directly affected by the relevant crisis
especially if BASF Group customers in other countries were to change their investment and business
plans as a result of the relevant crisis.
In case any of the mentioned risks materialize and observed market growth rates decline below BASF
Group's respective assumptions, negative, material implications on BASF Group's sales volumes and
financial position, margins, operational performance and overall operational results may arise. Depending
on the significance and duration of deterioration, implications on the Group's overall competitive
positioning or overall financial position might arise as well.
A significant macroeconomic risk arises from the possibility that measures to contain the coronavirus
imposed by governments and other competent authorities in different countries such as curfews,
lockdowns, travel and transportation restrictions, quarantines and social distancing are kept in place for a
longer period of time or augmented, and, as a result, negatively affect global supply chains and slow
global economic growth. Such development could have a number of negative effects on BASF’s operating
results and its business and financial position including lower sales volumes or margins driven by
significantly decreased market demands for BASF’s products, shutdown of BASF’s or its customers or
supplier’s plants or other facilities, restrictions on supply chains, unavailability of personnel and increase of
credit costs and liquidity risks. Potential further negative consequences could be a severe disruption of the
financial system in general or an unsustainable rise of public and private debt challenging the recovery of
the global economy and the markets in which BASF operates.
Production and Investment risks
In the BASF Verbund, production facilities and technologies are intelligently networked, with high-output
chemical processes that use energy and resources efficiently. The by-products of one plant serve as
feedstock elsewhere, creating efficient value chains – from basic chemicals to high value-added solutions
such as coatings or crop protection products. Plant breakdowns as for example due to technical defects of
BASF's TDI plant may harm the Verbund production. Guaranteeing the quality and availability of BASF
Group's products can require unforeseen technical measures. Moreover, there is the risk that unscheduled
plant shutdowns will be required for safety reasons or due to technical problems. For example, as a
precaution BASF Group shuts down plants at the sites on the U.S. Gulf Coast in the event of hurricane
warnings. The availability of infrastructure, production plants and supply chains can be negatively affected
by system downtime confidentiality breaches, or manipulation of data in critical IT systems and
applications. The threat environment has changed in recent years, as attackers have become better
organized, use more sophisticated technology, and have far more resources available.
Risks from investments can result from, for example, technical malfunctions or schedule and budget
breaches. BASF Group's decisions on the type, scope and locations of its investment projects are based
on assumptions related to the long-term development of markets, margins and costs, as well as raw
                                                      12


material availability and country, currency, sustainability and technology risks. Risks arise from potential
deviations in actual developments from BASF Group's assumptions.
Furthermore, BASF Group is subject to operating risks associated with chemical manufacturing, including
the risks of production, distribution, handling and storage of BASF Group's products. These operating risks
have the potential to cause personal injury, property damage and environmental contamination, and may
result in business interruptions, the shutdown of affected facilities and liability for compensation payments.
Any of these events may adversely affect BASF Group's operating results.
Purchasing and supply chain risks
Delivery bottlenecks resulting from interruptions in production or the supply chain and raw material
shortages may adversely affect BASF Group's operating results and revenues.
There is currently great uncertainty surrounding the supply of natural gas from Russia to Europe. A
continuous supply of natural gas according to demand is essential to chemical production. Around 60% of
the natural gas consumed by BASF in Europe is used to generate the energy (steam and electricity)
needed for production. Around 40% of natural gas is used as a raw material to produce important basic
chemicals and a wide range of products in the downstream value chains supplying almost all sectors of
industry. An interruption to or significant restriction of the supply of natural gas would have a significant
impact on BASF's European activities and could, for example, lead to production shutdowns. The
consequences would vary depending on the duration and extent of supply restrictions, the existence of
alternative supply sources and possible substitutions, as well as any optimization of production to reduce
the use of natural gas.
Supply security for raw materials, energy and services is increasingly affected by trade disputes,
protectionism and geopolitical conflict. In addition, supply chains are increasingly threatened by disruptions
such as suppliers' production bottlenecks, interrupted logistics chains, extreme weather events, and
longer-lasting effects from the coronavirus pandemic. Climate change and extreme weather events are
impacting the availability of renewable resources. These risks, as well as the introduction of new
environmental regulations (for example, carbon fees), can have an impact on purchasing prices.
Transportation costs are significantly affected by capacity constraints (for example, a lack of truck drivers,
traffic jams due to inadequate logistics infrastructure). The ongoing expansion of the regulatory framework
affects BASF and its suppliers. Potential non-compliance by BASF's suppliers may lead to a reduced
supplier base. Moreover, the availability of renewable energies depends largely on favourable prices and
framework conditions.
Additionally, risks regarding increasing, unexpected extreme weather conditions such as heavy rain events,
flooding, hurricanes, storms, and low or high-water levels might further impose challenges on BASF
Group's global supply chain and production abilities and impact all Operating Divisions' performance
negatively. For example, BASF can no longer rule out extreme low-water situations or heat waves caused
by climate change at its Verbund site in Ludwigshafen, Germany.
Risks arising from acquisitions/divestitures/cooperations
BASF Group is constantly watching its environment in order to identify possible targets and develop its
portfolio appropriately. In addition, BASF Group works together in collaborations with customers and
partners to jointly develop new, competitive products and applications. Risks arise in connection with
acquisitions and divestitures from the conclusion of a transaction, or it being completed earlier or later than
expected. They relate to the regular earnings contributions gained or lost as well as the realization of gains
or losses from divestitures if these deviate from BASF Group's planning assumptions. Following
acquisition and investment activities, regular goodwill impairment tests are performed, which ultimately
lead to the potential risk of goodwill impairments and consequently negative financial impact, including
investments accounted for using the equity method.
Acquisitions and other financial investment decisions are associated with complex risks due to the high
level of capital involved and the long-term capital commitment. They also come along with potentially
increased staff turnover, unexpected high integration costs, delayed realization of synergies and the
assumption of obligations that were not precisely quantifiable in advance. In addition, risks could arise
from divestitures as a result of potential warranty claims or other contractual obligations, such as long-term
supply agreements, which may reduce BASF Group’s profitability.
Competition risks
Increasing competition, in particular from emerging markets, may pose a risk to BASF Group's earnings
and market shares. Overcapacities, for example due to new market entrances by competitors or other
market participants, might intensify the competitive environment increasing risks on BASF Group's
respective pricing and volume strategies, as for example observed in the cracker product markets. In
addition, BASF Group may face competition from raw material suppliers expanding their value chains.
                                                      13


BASF expects a continuous rise in customer demand for sustainable solutions, for example, products with
a low carbon footprint, made from recycled, circular, or bio-based raw materials that are biodegradeable,
or products with other measurable sustainability benefits. BASF is therefore addressing these topics in
research and investment programs for the sustainable transformation of BASF. Companies with a proven
track record of providing more sustainable solutions will be able to achieve higher growth and profitability
as a result. However, there are technical and commercial risks of failure associated with every single
research and development project. More generally, BASF Group's operating results depend on the
development of commercially viable new products and production technologies. Due to the high degree of
complexity and uncertainty involved in chemical and biological research, there is a risk that projects might
be discontinued for technical or economic reasons, budgets or schedules may be exceeded or developed
products will not receive regulatory approval for sale or will not achieve the expected commercial success.
Additional competition risks might arise from digitalization. Digital business models could potentially disrupt
conventional business models in the chemical industry. The rapid development in the digitalization of
chemical plants and the resulting increased efficiency impose risks with regard to operational competition.
Further, the expansion of sharing economy business models could have a long-term impact on demand in
individual customer industries.
Personnel risks
As a leading Chemical company, BASF Group's future success depends in part on its continued ability to
hire, integrate and retain highly skilled employees. This includes for example complex fields as Research
and Development, Operations (e.g. chemical technicians), Engineering and increasingly Digitalization and
Information Technology. At the same time the number of positions will decrease in other fields due to
digitalization effects and a lean organization. BASF Group expects a medium to long-term shortage of
skilled employees due to demographic changes, especially in North America and Europe and depending
on future growth rates. As a result, there is an increased risk that job vacancies may not be filled with
suitable applicants, or only after a delay.
Information technology risks
BASF Group relies on a large number of IT systems including one global ERP system. Their non-
availability, violation of confidentiality or the manipulation of critical IT systems and applications can all
have a direct impact on all business processes run at BASF Group. The threat environment has changed
in recent years, as cyber attackers have become better organized, use more sophisticated technology,
and have far more resources available. If data are lost or manipulated, this can, for example, negatively
affect plant availability, process safety and the accuracy of its ﬁnancial reporting. Unauthorized access to
sensitive data, such as personnel records and customer data, competition-related information or research
results, can result in legal consequences or jeopardize BASF Group's competitive position or overall
financial position. This would also be accompanied by the associated loss of reputation.

2.   Risks related to the issuer's and guarantor's financial situation
Exchange rate volatility risks
BASF Group has companies in more than 90 countries and supplies products and services to around
90,000 customers in almost every country in the world. BASF Group works with over 70,000 suppliers
worldwide. Therefore, BASF Group's competitiveness on global markets is influenced by fluctuations in
exchange rates. Financial currency risks result from the translation of receivables, liabilities and other
monetary items in accordance with IAS 21 at the closing rate into the functional currency of the respective
Group company. For BASF Group's sales, risks arise in particular when the U.S. dollar exchange rate
ﬂuctuates. Assuming other conditions remain the same, a full-year rise in the value of the U.S. dollar/euro
exchange rate by $ 0.01 would result in an increase of around €30 million in BASF Group's EBIT. Vice
versa, a full-year decrease in the value of the U.S. dollar/euro exchange rate by $ 0.01 would result in a
decrease of BASF Group's EBIT to a similar extent.
Liquidity and credit risks
BASF Group's ability to finance its business depends on future developments of financial markets. Access
to extensive liquidity is substantial to balance risks from fluctuating cash flows from cyclical businesses.
This access to liquid funds may be limited during a financial crisis. A rating downgrade may increase
BASF Group's financing costs and negatively impact the market values of the Notes. Credit ratings
assigned to BASF Group or any of the Notes may not reflect the potential impact of all risks related to
structure, market and other factors. Rating agencies may also change their methodologies for rating
issuers or securities in the future. An actual or anticipated downgrade of ratings could result in increased
interest and other financial expenses. It could also have a material negative impact on the market values
of the Notes
                                                     14


Although BASF Group only engages in transactions with banks with good credit ratings and by adhering to
fixed limits for exposures, any counterparty might not be able to fulfil its obligations and BASF Group might
not be able to close open positions in advance. Customers might also not fulfil their obligations from
purchase agreements, resulting in an impairment of receivables BASF Group might suffer from losses of
assets in individual countries. In particular, BASF Group's crop protection products are typically sold
pursuant to contracts with long payment terms. These extended payment periods make BASF Group's
crop protection business susceptible to losses on receivables during local or regional economic crises,
which may adversely affect BASF Group's operating results and liquidity.
Interest rates risks
Interest rate risks result from potential changes in prevailing market interest rates. These can cause a
change in the fair value of ﬁxed-rate instruments and fluctuations in the interest payments for variable-rate
financial instruments, which would positively or negatively affect earnings. In addition to market interest
rates, BASF Group's financing costs are determined by the credit risk premiums to be paid. These are
mainly influenced by the credit rating and the market conditions at the time of issue. The variable interest
risk exposure, which also includes fixed rate bonds maturing in the following year, amounted to minus
€2,408 million as of December 31, 2021 (2020: minus €1,659 million). An increase in all relevant interest
rates by one percentage point of BASF Group's outstanding debt instruments would have lowered income
before income taxes by €9 million as of December 31, 2021, and by €10 million as of December 31, 2020.
Metal and raw materials trading risks
In the catalysts business, BASF Group employs commodity derivatives for precious metals and trades
precious metals on behalf of third parties and on its own account. Appropriate commodity derivatives are
also traded to optimize BASF Group's supply of refinery products, gas and other petrochemical raw
materials. Although trading is conducted within predetermined limits and exposure constraints, adverse
market developments could lead to significant losses or changes in market values of employed
instruments, which may require significant liquidity.
Impairment risks
Asset impairment risk arises if the assumed interest rate in an impairment test increases, the predicted
cash flows decline, or investment projects are suspended. The current market circumstances are being
influenced by an ongoing pandemic, a possible gas supply shortage in Europe which could affect many of
BASF’s operations, as well as further uncertainties related to geopolitical developments like the war in
Ukraine. These uncertainties about future economic developments will be closely monitored to timely
establish countermeasures to mitigate or minimize the impact on BASF. Despite these increased risks and
the observable increase in the risk-free interest rate, BASF currently does not see any concrete material
impairment needs. The same applies to investments accounted for using the equity method, specifically
BASF’s shareholding of Wintershall Dea for which impairments in the first quarter (Q1) of 2022 in the
context of the war in Ukraine have been recognized. Since the current situation continues to be dominated
by extreme uncertainty, future developments may have a significant and adverse effect on the
performance of the assets and may lead to further impairments.
Risks related to personnel costs
Most employees are granted company pension benefits from either defined contribution or defined benefit
plans. BASF Group predominantly finances company pension obligations externally through separate plan
assets. This particularly includes BASF Pensionskasse VVaG and BASF Pensionstreuhand e.V. in
Germany, in addition to the large pension plans of BASF Group companies in North America, the United
Kingdom and Switzerland.
The fund assets required to cover future pension obligations are actuarially determined using, among
others, assumptions concerning the expected return on plan assets. The plan assets are partially
comprised of equity and other risky investments. Declining or even negative returns on these investments
and a lack of diversification between different asset classes may adversely affect the future fair value of
plan assets and could trigger an additional contribution to the pension plan to cover future pension
obligations. Additional contributions to pension plans may also be triggered by declining interest rates
leading to higher present values of future pension liabilities. As some of the defined contribution plans
include minimum interest guarantees, a permanent continuation of the low interest rate environment could
make it necessary to recognize pension obligations and plan assets for these plans as well.
BASF Group's senior executives have the opportunity to participate in a share price-based compensation
program. The development of the BASF SE share price and the MSCI World Chemicals Index may lead to
a corresponding increase in personnel costs. From 2020 onward, the previous LTI program for senior
executives was replaced by a new program. The new program will incentivize the development of the total
                                                      15


shareholder return, as well as the achievement of strategic growth, profitability and sustainability targets.
The development of these targets may lead to a corresponding increase in personnel costs.
Furthermore, changes to the legal environment of a particular country can have an impact on the
development of personnel expenses for BASF Group.

3.   Legal and regulatory risks
Regulation/policy risks
BASF expects continued regulatory and societal pressure to achieve climate-neutral energy production,
climate-neutral energy consumption, and a climate-neutral resource and raw materials base. The political
approaches to address these issues will vary greatly from region to region. However, based on Europe in
particular, BASF expects measures with a high level of regulation and detail that will have the potential to
significantly impact the competitiveness of BASF's operations and product portfolio. Furthermore, there is
a risk of the current geopolitical shift in balance of power leading to the establishment of uncoordinated or
divergent global legislative standards and regulatory systems, not just in relation to chemicals, but also to
environmental, social and corporate governance criteria and the regulatory framework for digitalization.
As a globally operating company, BASF Group conducts business and is involved in projects with
customers and business partners in countries that are subject of export control regulations, embargoes,
sanctions or other forms of trade restrictions imposed by the U.S., the European Union or other countries
or organizations. Risks for BASF Group can in particular arise from intensified geopolitical tensions, which
could result in the broadening of existing or enactment of new embargoes and sanctions laws, the
destabilization of political systems or the introduction of new trade barriers (which could, in each case,
have retroactive effect). Consequently, there might be a significant negative impact on the overall market
growth, customer demand in key industries or on important chemical markets in form of shifted supply and
demand balances. Considering BASF Group's global business, BASF Group encounters risks associated
with existing, new or amended sanctions and trade laws. Depending on the content, scope and
applicability of these sanctions, there can be no assurance that certain BASF Group's business activities
or projects will not be affected by such sanctions, embargoes or similar laws or regulations.
Risks for BASF Group can also arise from new regulations, including stricter emission limits for plants or
energy and climate laws. Changes in this regard might potentially restrict BASF Group's production output
and, depending on the extent of changes, impose risks on the company's future growth. Furthermore,
additional cost burdens might arise as well, impacting financial position negatively. In addition, risks to
BASF Group can be posed by further laws in key customer industries or on the use or registration of
agricultural and other chemicals and thus limiting the company's sales and impose further cost burdens to
adapt products or registrations to revised regulations. Further risks may arise from increasing state
protectionism and the demand for localization of intellectual property in order to achieve technological
independence.
Legal disputes and proceedings risks
With its international operations, BASF Group is exposed to numerous legal risks. These may include, in
particular, risks relating to product liability, competition and antitrust law, export control, data protection,
patent law, procurement law, tax legislation and environmental protection in the countries where BASF
Group operates, including countries such as the United States, where legal risks – in particular legal risks
stemming from class action product liability - have historically been more significant than in other countries.
BASF Group is involved in legal, regulatory, governmental and arbitration proceedings and may become
involved in additional proceedings. These proceedings involve claims by and against BASF Group which
arise in the ordinary course of its businesses, including in connection with its business activities or its role
as employer, investor and taxpayer. Any proceeding might negatively impact BASF Group. The outcome
of current pending or future proceedings and investigations can often not be predicted with certainty. Legal
or regulatory judgements or agreed settlements may give rise to significant losses, costs and expenses
which are not covered, or not fully covered, by insurance benefits or provisions. Such losses, costs and
expenses may have a material adverse impact on the business and financial position of BASF Group.
Investigations of possible legal or regulatory violations, such as potential infringements of antitrust law or
certain marketing or distribution methods, may result in civil or criminal penalties – including substantial
monetary fines – or other adverse financial consequences, and may harm BASF Group's reputation and
ultimately hamper its commercial success.
Risks from changes in taxation
BASF Group and BASF Finance are governed by the tax rules and regulations applicable in the country of
their residence. A change in such rules and regulations may result in a higher tax rates or expenses. In
addition, changes in tax legislation may have a significant impact on BASF Group's and BASF Finance's
                                                      16


tax receivables and tax liabilities as well as on its deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities. Future
interpretations of these regulations and/or changes in the tax system might have an impact on BASF's and
BASF Finance's tax liabilities, profitability and business operations. BASF Group and BASF Finance are
regularly audited by the tax authorities and it cannot be excluded that such tax audits will lead to additional
tax claims that could have a material adverse effect on its business, financial condition, financial position
and results of operations.

4.   Internal control risks
Internal control risks
BASF Group has companies in more than 90 countries and operates six Verbund sites and 232 additional
production sites worldwide. It has eleven divisions grouped into six segments. These divisions manage 50
global and regional business units and develop strategies for the 75 strategic business units. All these
business units are active on several markets in countries all around the world and their respective
businesses are, individually and taken as a whole, exposed to varying degrees of risk and respective
uncertainty on a global and or a local level where these businesses are being operated. Their assessment
is dependent on a number of factors and based on assumptions which may prove not to be accurate.
Although BASF Group has an extensive and global enterprise risk management system in place, including
a "3 Lines of Defense" model (employees, Corporate Center and corporate audit), the mere size of BASF
Group and the aforementioned complexity causes a residual internal control risk. Potentially, material risks
might not be recognized appropriately within the enterprise risk management framework or might be
assessed to be immaterial, remote or unlikely at source, although they might have a material adverse
effect on BASF Group's business operations and financial position and results of operations after
aggregation or when occurring simultaneously.

5.   Environmental, Social and Governance Risks
Environmental risks
For BASF Group as an energy-intensive company, environmental and sustainability risks arise especially
from regulatory changes, such as in carbon prices through emissions trading systems, taxes or energy
legislation. In particular, there is a risk of an increase in pricing of greenhouse gas emissions, which may
impose cost burdens from the EU emissions trading system compared to other global competitors which
do not have comparable additional costs. In addition, BASF's emissions footprint and intensity could lead
to a negative perception and reduced appeal among external stakeholders such as customers or investors.
Additionally, as a chemical company, BASF Group operates with hazardous and toxic materials, which
require adequate handling and processing. Any non-compliance with BASF Group's high safety standards
may result in severe damages to the environment and, consequently, adversely affect BASF Group's
reputation, business and/or financial position.
Social risks
As BASF Group operates globally and despite extensive measures taken to ensure the adherence to
social standards, such as due diligence obligations or audits, BASF Group is exposed to risks from non-
compliance with these standards by its employees, suppliers or other partners, for example in the
procurement of mineral raw materials, which can ultimately lead to adverse effects on BASF Group's
reputation, business or financial position.
Governance risks
As per year-end 2021, BASF Group recorded around 111,000 employees worldwide. Due to the high
number of employees, BASF Group is especially exposed to any kind of unlawful or unethical behavior or
other kind of misconduct by individuals. Unethical behavior and non-compliance with BASF Group's
integrity standards due to intentional and fraudulent behavior of employees could materially harm BASF
Group's business, financial position, profit, and reputation. BASF Group may encounter unethical behavior
and non-compliance with applicable laws, regulations and BASF Group's guidelines and integrity
standards due to intentional and fraudulent behavior of individual employees, possibly in collusion with
external third parties. In addition to intentional behavior, problems could also arise due to negligence in the
adherence to applicable laws, regulations and internal or external guidelines. Unethical behavior and
misconduct attributable to BASF Group could not only lead to criminal charges, fines and claims by injured
parties, but also to financial loss, and severe reputational damage. This could have a material adverse
effect on BASF Group's business, financial position, profit, and cash flows.
                                                      17


                      RISK FACTORS REGARDING BASF FINANCE EUROPE N.V.


BASF Finance continued operations depend on the ability of BASF SE and other members of BASF Group
to meet their payment obligations under intra-group loans provided to them by BASF Finance. In the event
that a member of the BASF Group fails to make a payment under an intra-group loan, BASF Finance may
not be able to meet its payment obligations under the Notes issued by it.
All debt securities of BASF Finance (such as the Notes) are wholly and unconditionally guaranteed by
BASF SE in respect of principal and interest payments. This Guarantee is enforceable under the laws of
Germany.
For the risk factors regarding BASF SE and BASF Group please see the separate section above.


                                RISK FACTORS REGARDING THE NOTES


The risk factors regarding the Notes are presented in the following categories depending on their nature
with the most material risk factor presented first in each category:
1.   Risks related to the nature of the Notes
2.   Risks related to specific Terms and Conditions of the Notes
3.   Risks related to the Guarantor and the Guarantee
4.   Other related Risks

1.   Risks related to the nature of the Notes
Market price risk, in particular with regard to Fixed Rate Notes and Floating Rate Notes
The development of market prices of the Notes depends on various factors, such as changes of market
interest rate levels or the lack of or excess demand for the relevant type of Note. The Holders of Notes are
therefore exposed to the risk of an unfavorable development of market prices of their Notes, which
materializes if the Holders sell the Notes prior to the final maturity of such Notes. If a Holder of Notes
decides to hold the Notes until final maturity, the Notes will be redeemed at the amount set out in the
relevant Final Terms.
Different Rates of Interest may apply to the Notes which will result in a step-up or step-down of the
applicable rate of interest (Step-up Fixed Rate Notes or Step-Down Fixed Rate Notes). The holder of such
Notes is exposed to an increased risk that the nominal interest rate falls below the initially set interest rate
and no assurance can be given that the respective investment will constitute an appropriate market return.
In particular, a Holder of Fixed Rate Notes (including Step-up Fixed Rate Notes or Step-Down Fixed Rate
Notes) is exposed to the risk that the price of such Notes falls as a result of changes in the market interest
rate levels. While the nominal interest rate of a Fixed Rate Note as specified in the applicable Final Terms
is fixed during the life of such Notes, the current interest rate on the capital market ("market interest
rate") typically changes on a daily basis. As the market interest rate changes, the price of Fixed Rate
Notes also changes, but in the opposite direction. If the market interest rate increases, the price of Fixed
Rate Notes typically falls, until the yield of such Notes is approximately equal to the market interest rate of
comparable issues. If the market interest rate falls, the price of Fixed Rate Notes typically increases, until
the yield of such Notes is approximately equal to the market interest rate of comparable issues. The same
risk applies to Step-up Fixed Rate Notes or Step-Down Fixed Rate Notes if the market interest rates in
respect of comparable Notes are higher than the rates applicable to such Notes. If the Holder of Fixed
Rate Notes holds such Notes until maturity, changes in the market interest rate are without relevance to
such Holder as the Notes will be redeemed at a specified redemption amount, usually the principal amount
of such Notes.
A Holder of Floating Rate Notes is particularly exposed to the risk of fluctuating interest rate levels and
uncertain interest income. Fluctuating interest rate levels make it impossible to determine the profitability
of Floating Rate Notes in advance. Neither the current nor the historical value of the relevant floating rate
should be taken as an indication of the future development of such floating rate during the term of any
Notes.
                                                       18


Liquidity risk
Application has been made to the Luxembourg Stock Exchange for Notes issued under this Prospectus to
be admitted to trading on the Regulated Market or on the professional segment of the Regulated Market of
the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and to be listed on the official list of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. In
addition, the Program provides that Notes may not be listed at all. Regardless of whether the Notes are
listed or not, there is a risk that no liquid secondary market for the Notes will develop or, if it does develop,
that it will not continue. The fact that the Notes may be listed does not necessarily lead to greater liquidity
as compared to unlisted Notes. If Notes are not listed on any exchange, pricing information for such Notes
may, however, be more difficult to obtain which may affect the liquidity of the Notes adversely. In an illiquid
market, an investor is subject to the risk that he will not be able to sell his Notes at any time at fair market
prices. The possibility to sell the Notes might additionally be restricted by country specific reasons.


2.   Risks related to specific Terms and Conditions of the Notes
Risk of early redemption
The applicable Final Terms will indicate whether an Issuer may have the right to call the Notes prior to
maturity (optional call right) on one or several dates determined beforehand or whether the Notes will be
subject to early redemption upon the occurrence of an event specified in the applicable Final Terms (early
redemption event). Furthermore, the Issuer has a right for termination in the case of Floating Rate Notes if
a Replacement Rate, an Adjustment Spread, if any, or the Replacement Rate Adjustments cannot be
determined following a Rate Replacement Event as set out in the Terms and Conditions. In addition, each
Issuer will always have the right to redeem the Notes if the relevant Issuer is required to pay additional
amounts (gross-up payments) on the Notes for reasons of taxation as set out in the Terms and Conditions.
If the relevant Issuer redeems the Notes prior to maturity or the Notes are subject to early redemption due
to an early redemption event, a Holder of such Notes is exposed to the risk that due to such early
redemption his investment will have a lower than expected yield. The Issuer can be expected to exercise
his optional call right if the yield on comparable Notes in the capital market has fallen which means that the
investor may only be able to reinvest the redemption proceeds in comparable Notes with a lower yield. On
the other hand, the Issuer can be expected not to exercise its optional call right if the yield on comparable
Notes in the capital market has increased. In this event, an investor will not be able to reinvest the
redemption proceeds in comparable Notes with a higher yield. It should be noted, however, that the
relevant Issuer may exercise any optional call right irrespective of market interest rates on a call date.
Specific risks regarding Floating Rate Notes linked to EURIBOR
The interest rates of Floating Rate Notes are linked to reference rates such as the Euro Interbank Offered
Rate (EURIBOR) which is deemed to be a "benchmark" (a "Benchmark") and which is the subject of
recent national, international and other regulatory guidance and proposals for reform. Some of these
reforms are already effective while others are still to be implemented.
Following the implementation of such potential reforms, the manner of administration of a Benchmark may
change, with the result that they perform differently than in the past, or a Benchmark could be eliminated
entirely, or there could be consequences which cannot be predicted. Any changes to a Benchmark as a
result of the BMR or other initiatives could have a material adverse effect on the costs of obtaining
exposure to a Benchmark or the costs and risks of administering or otherwise participating in the setting of
a Benchmark and complying with any such regulations or requirements. Such factors may have the effect
of discouraging market participants from continuing to administer or participate in a certain Benchmark,
trigger changes in the rules or methodologies used in a certain Benchmark or lead to the disappearance of
a certain Benchmark.
As regards EURIBOR, the new hybrid calculation of EURIBOR has already been adapted to the
requirements of the BMR. However, the EURIBOR is subject to constant review and revision. It is currently
not foreseeable whether EURIBOR will continue to exist permanently and beyond 2025.
Investors should be aware that, if a Benchmark were discontinued or otherwise unavailable, the rate of
interest on Floating Rate Notes which are linked to or which reference such Benchmark will be determined
for the relevant interest period by the fallback provisions applicable to such Notes. The Terms and
Conditions of the Notes distinguish between fallback arrangements in the event that a published
Benchmark, such as EURIBOR (including any screen page on which such Benchmark may be published
(or any successor page)) becomes temporarily unavailable or permanently unavailable (so-called Rate
Replacement Event).
In certain circumstances, the ultimate fallback for determining the rate of interest for a particular interest
period, may result in the rate of interest for the last preceding interest period being used. This may result in
the effective application of a fixed rate for Floating Rate Notes based on the rate which was last observed
                                                         19


on the relevant screen page for the purposes of determining the rate of interest in respect of an interest
period.
If a Rate Replacement Event (which, amongst other events, includes the permanent discontinuation of the
Benchmark) occurs, fallback arrangements will include the possibility that:
(i)    the relevant rate of interest could be determined by reference to a Replacement Rate determined by
       (i) the Issuer if in its opinion the Replacement Rate is obvious and as such without any reasonable
       doubt determinable by an investor that is knowledgeable in the respective type of bonds, such as the
       Notes, or (ii) failing which, an independent advisor (each the "Relevant Determining Party"); and
(ii)   such Replacement Rate may be adjusted (if required) by an Adjustment Spread (as defined in § 3 of
       the Terms and Conditions in Option II) to be applied to the Replacement Rate in order to reduce or
       eliminate, to the extent reasonably practicable, any transfer of economic value between the Issuer
       and the Holders that would otherwise arise as a result of the replacement of the Benchmark against
       the Replacement Rate.
However, the Issuer may be unable to appoint an independent advisor at commercially reasonable terms,
using reasonable endeavors or the Relevant Determining Party may not be able to determine a
Replacement Rate, an Adjustment Spread, if any, or the Rate Replacement Adjustments (as defined in § 3
of the Terms and Conditions in Option II) in accordance with the Terms and Conditions of the Floating
Rate Notes. If a Replacement Rate, an Adjustment Spread, if any, or the Rate Replacement Adjustments
cannot be determined, the rate of interest for the relevant interest period will be the rate of interest
applicable as at the last preceding interest determination date before the occurrence of the Rate
Replacement Event, or, where the Rate Replacement Event occurs before the first interest determination
date, the rate of interest will be the initial rate of interest. Applying the initial rate of interest, or the rate of
interest applicable as at the last preceding interest determination date before the occurrence of the Rate
Replacement Event could result in Notes linked to or referencing the relevant Benchmark performing
differently (which may include payment of a lower rate of interest) than they would do if the relevant
Benchmark were to continue to apply, or if a Replacement Rate could be determined. Ultimately, a failure
to determine the Replacement Rate and Adjustment Spread, if any, for the interest period immediately
following a Rate Replacement Event will result either in the same Benchmark being applied for the
determination of the relevant rates of interest until maturity of the Floating Rate Notes, effectively turning
the floating rate of interest into a fixed rate of interest (which will be the case if any attempt to determine a
Replacement Rate and Adjustment Spread, if any, prior to each interest determination date fails), or that
the Notes will be called by the Issuer at its sole discretion pursuant to § 3 of the Terms and Conditions in
Option II. In the case that the same Benchmark will be applied for the determination of the relevant rates of
interest until maturity of the Floating Rate Notes, a Holder would no longer participate in any favourable
movements of market interest rates, including central banks' key interest rates, that would have been
reflected in the relevant Benchmark rate if the Benchmark would not have been discontinued or otherwise
been unavailable, and payments of interest under the Floating Rate Notes would be lower than they would
have been had the Benchmark not been discontinued or otherwise been unavailable.
Also, even if a Replacement Rate was determined and an Adjustment Spread, if any, was applied to that
Replacement Rate, such an Adjustment Spread may not be effective to reduce or eliminate economic
prejudice to Holders. The application of an Adjustment Spread, if any, to a Replacement Rate may still
result in Floating Rate Notes originally linked to or referencing a Benchmark to perform differently (which
may include payment of a lower rate of interest) than they would if the Benchmark were to continue to
apply in its current form.
In addition, the Relevant Determining Party may also establish that, consequentially, other amendments to
the Terms and Conditions of the Floating Rate Notes are necessary to enable the operation of the
Replacement Rate (which may include, without limitation, adjustments to the applicable business day
convention, the definition of business day, the interest determination date, the day count fraction and any
methodology or definition for obtaining or calculating the Replacement Rate). No consent of the Holders
shall be required in connection with effecting any relevant Replacement Rate or any other related
adjustments and/or amendments described above.
Any such consequences could have a material adverse effect on the value of and return on any such
Notes. Moreover, any of the above matters or any other significant change to the setting or existence of
any relevant rate could affect the ability of the Issuer to meet its obligations under the Floating Rate Notes
or could have a material adverse effect on the value or liquidity of, and the amount payable under, the
Floating Rate Notes. Investors should note that, in the case of a replacement of a Benchmark the Relevant
Determining Party will have discretion to adjust the Replacement Rate in the circumstances described
above. Any such adjustment could have unexpected commercial consequences and there can be no
assurance that, due to the particular circumstances of each Holder, any such adjustment will be favorable
to each Holder.
                                                    20


Although it is uncertain whether or to what extent any of the above-mentioned changes and/or any further
changes in the administration or method for determining a Benchmark could have an effect on the value of
any Notes whose interest is linked to or referencing the relevant Benchmark, investors should be aware
that they face the risk that any changes to the relevant Benchmark may have a material adverse effect on
the value or the liquidity of, and the amounts payable under Notes whose rate of interest is linked to a
Benchmark.
Currency risk
A Holder of Notes denominated in a foreign currency (i.e. a currency which is different from the official
currency where the investor is domiciled) is particularly exposed to the risk of changes in currency
exchange rates, which may affect the yield of such Notes. Changes in currency exchange rates result from
various factors such as macro-economic factors, speculative transactions and interventions by central
banks and governments.
A change in the value of any foreign currency against the euro, for example, will result in a corresponding
change in the euro value of Notes denominated in a currency other than euro and a corresponding change
in the euro value of interest and principal payments made in a currency other than euro in accordance with
the terms of such Notes. If the underlying exchange rate falls and the value of the euro correspondingly
rises, the price of the Notes and the value of interest and principal payments made thereunder expressed
in euro falls.
In addition, government and monetary authorities may impose (as some have done in the past) exchange
controls that could adversely affect an applicable currency exchange rate. As a result, investors may
receive less interest or principal than expected, or no interest or principal at all.
Risks related to Renminbi ("RMB")-denominated Notes
RMB is not freely convertible at present. This may adversely affect the liquidity of the RMB denominated
Notes ("RMB Notes"); the availability of RMB funds for servicing the RMB Notes may be subject to future
limitations imposed by the PRC government.
The PRC government continues to regulate conversion between RMB and foreign currencies, including
the euro, despite the significant reduction over the years by the PRC government of control over routine
foreign exchange transactions under current accounts. Currently participating banks in, inter alia,
Frankfurt, London, Singapore, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan have been permitted to engage in the
settlement of RMB trade transactions. This represents a current account activity.
While there have been several reforms to further reduce governmental control over foreign exchange
transactions in recent years, there is no assurance that the PRC government will continue to liberalize a
control over cross-border RMB remittances in the future or that new PRC regulations will not be
promulgated in the future which have the effect of restricting or eliminating the remittance of RMB into or
outside the PRC. In the event that funds cannot be repatriated outside the PRC in RMB, this may affect
the overall availability of RMB outside the PRC and the ability of the Issuer to source RMB to perform its
obligations under RMB Notes.
As a result of the restrictions imposed by the PRC government on cross-border RMB fund flows, the
availability of RMB outside of the PRC is limited. Currently, licensed banks in Singapore, Hong Kong and
Taiwan may offer limited RMB-denominated banking services to Singapore residents, Hong Kong
residents, Taiwan residents and specified business customers. The People's Bank of China ("PBOC") has
also established a RMB clearing and settlement system for participating banks in Hong Kong, Singapore,
Taiwan, London, Frankfurt and Seoul. Each of Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, Singapore
Branch, Bank of China (Hong Kong) Limited, Bank of China, Taipei Branch, China Construction Bank
(London) Limited, Bank of China, Frankfurt Branch and Bank of Communications, Seoul Branch (each an
"RMB Clearing Bank") has entered into settlement agreements with the PBOC to act as the RMB clearing
bank in Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, London, Frankfurt and Seoul, respectively.
However, the current size of RMB-denominated financial assets outside the PRC is limited. RMB business
participating banks do not have direct RMB liquidity support from the PBOC. They are only allowed to
square their open positions with the relevant RMB Clearing Bank after consolidating the RMB trade
position of banks outside Singapore, Hong Kong, Taiwan, London, Frankfurt and Seoul that are in the
same bank group of the participating bank concerned with their own trade position and the relevant RMB
Clearing Bank only has access to onshore liquidity support from the PBOC for the purposes of squaring
open positions of participating banks for limited types of transactions, including open positions resulting
from conversion services for corporations relating to cross-border trade settlement. The relevant RMB
Clearing Bank is not obliged to square for participating banks any open positions resulting from other
                                                      21


foreign exchange transactions or conversion services and the participating banks will need to source RMB
from the offshore market to square such open positions.
Although it is expected that the offshore RMB market will continue to grow in depth and size, its growth is
subject to many constraints as a result of PRC laws and regulations on foreign exchange. There is no
assurance that new PRC regulations will not be promulgated or the settlement agreements will not be
terminated or amended in the future which will have the effect of restricting availability of RMB offshore.
The limited availability of RMB outside the PRC may affect the liquidity of the RMB Notes. To the extent
the Issuer is required to source RMB in the offshore market to service its RMB Notes, there is no
assurance that the Issuer will be able to source such RMB on satisfactory terms, if at all.
The value of the RMB against the euro and other foreign currencies fluctuates from time to time and is
affected by changes in the PRC and international political and economic conditions and by many other
factors. Except in the limited circumstances as described in the Conditions, the Issuer will make all
payments of interest and principal with respect to the RMB Notes in RMB. As a result, the value of these
RMB payments in euro or other applicable foreign currency terms may vary with the prevailing exchange
rates in the marketplace. If the value of RMB depreciates against the euro or other applicable foreign
currency, the value of a noteholder's investment in euro or other applicable foreign currency terms will
decline.
If the Issuer cannot obtain RMB and is not able, or it is impracticable for it, to satisfy its obligation to pay
interest and principal on the RMB Notes when due, in whole or in part, in RMB in the relevant RMB
Settlement Centre as a result of Inconvertibility, Non transferability or Illiquidity (each, as defined in
§ 4(7)(d) in the Terms and Conditions of Option I), the Issuer shall be entitled to postpone any such
payment or, on giving not less than five or more than 30 days' irrevocable notice to the noteholders prior to
the due date for payment, to settle any such payment, in whole or in part, in U.S. dollars on the due date at
the U.S. Dollar Equivalent (as defined in the Terms and Conditions of Option I) of any such interest or
principal amount otherwise payable in RMB, as the case may be. The Issuer may early terminate the RMB
Notes if it decides to settle payments at the U.S. Dollar Equivalent due to Inconvertibility, Non-
transferability or Illiquidity.
Resolutions of Holders
Since the Notes provide for meetings of Holders or the taking of votes without a meeting, a Holder is
subject to the risk of being outvoted by a majority resolution of the Holders. As such majority resolution is
binding on all Holders, certain rights of such Holder against the Issuer under the Terms and Conditions
may be amended or reduced or even cancelled.
Holders' Representative
Since the Notes provide for the appointment of a Holders' Representative, either in the Terms and
Conditions or by a majority resolution of the Holders, it is possible that a Holder may be deprived of its
individual right to pursue and enforce its rights under the Terms and Conditions against the Issuer, such
right passing to the Holders' Representative who is then exclusively responsible to claim and enforce the
rights of all the Holders.

3.   Risks related to the Guarantor and the Guarantee
All debt securities of BASF Finance (such as the Notes) are wholly and unconditionally guaranteed by
BASF SE in respect of principal and interest payments. This Guarantee is enforceable under the laws of
Germany.
For the risk factors regarding BASF SE and BASF Group please see the separate section above.

4.   Other related Risks
Risks associated with Notes with a specific use of proceeds, such as green bonds
The Final Terms relating to any series of Notes issued under the Program may provide that it will be the
Issuer's intention to apply an amount equivalent to the net proceeds from an offer of such Notes
specifically to finance and/or refinance in whole or in part new or existing projects and activities that
promote climate-friendly, other environmental, sustainable and social purposes ("Eligible Projects"). Due
to the envisaged use of the proceeds from the issuance of such Series of Notes, the Issuer may refer to
such Notes as, e.g., "green bonds". The Issuer will establish a framework for such issuances which further
specifies the eligibility criteria for such Green Projects (the "Green Finance Framework"). The Green
Finance Framework is accessible on the website of the Issuer (www.basf.com). For the avoidance of
doubt, the Green Finance Framework and any other document related thereto including any footnotes,
                                                       22


links to the Issuer’s website and/or progress and impact assessment reports are not, nor shall they be
deemed to be, incorporated in and/or form part of this Prospectus.
Prospective investors should have regard to the information set out in the applicable Final Terms
regarding such use of proceeds and must determine for themselves the relevance of such information (in
particular, regarding the reasons for the offer and the use of proceeds) for the purpose of any investment
in such Notes together with any other investigation such investor deems necessary.
Furthermore, it should be noted that there is currently no clearly defined definition (legal, regulatory or
otherwise) of, nor market consensus as to what constitutes, a "green" or "sustainable" or "social" or an
equivalently-labelled project or as to what precise attributes are required for a particular project to be
defined as "green" or "sustainable" or "social" or such other equivalent label nor can any assurance be
given that such a clear definition or consensus will develop over time. Green bond issues are subject of
many and wide-ranging voluntary and regulatory initiatives to develop rules, guidelines, standards,
taxonomies and objectives.
For example, at EU level, the Regulation (EU) 2020(852 ("Taxonomy Regulation") was published in the
Official Journal of the European Union on 22 June 2020 and entered into force on 12 July 2020. It applies
in part as of 1 January 2022 and will apply in whole as of 1 January 2023. The Taxonomy Regulation tasks
the European Commission with establishing the actual list of environmentally sustainability activities by
defining technical screening criteria for each environmental objective through delegated acts. A first
delegated act on sustainability activities for climate change adaptation and mitigation objectives ("Climate
Delegated Act") was published. on 9 December 2021 in the Official Journal. The Climate Delegated Act is
applicable from 1 January 2022 and sets out, inter alia, the technical screening criteria (TSC) for
determining the conditions under which an economic activity qualifies as 'contributing substantially' to
climate change mitigation or climate change adaptation. On 2 February 2022, the EU Commission
approved in principle a draft taxonomy complementary climate delegated act on climate change mitigation
and adaptation covering certain gas and nuclear activities ("Complementary Climate Delegated Act").
The criteria for the specific gas and nuclear activities are in line with EU climate and environmental
objectives and will help accelerating the shift from solid or liquid fossil fuels, including coal, towards a
climate-neutral future. Once adopted, this Complementary Climate Delegated Act will amend the Climate
Delegated Act. Furthermore, on 6 July 2021, the European Commission has published a proposal for a
regulation on a voluntary European green bond standard ("EuGBS"). The standard will use the definitions
of green economic activities in the EU taxonomy to define what is considered a green investment and will
introduce a standard for companies and public authorities issuing green bonds to raise funds on capital
markets to finance ambitious investments, while meeting sustainability requirements and protecting
investors from greenwashing. However, this regulation is currently subject to the legislative process on an
EU level and has not been adopted yet. Against this background, and while the green bond standards
appear to develop at a higher pace now and should become more precise and more uniform in the near
future, no assurance or representation is given that any Notes issued as described in the Green Finance
Framework will, at any time, be compliant with the EuGBS and/or the Climate Delegated Acts.
Due to the still pending legislative initiatives, in particular, no assurance is given by the Issuer or the
Guarantor (if applicable), the Arranger or the Dealers that the use of such proceeds for any Eligible
Projects will satisfy, whether in whole or in part, any present or future investor expectations or
requirements as regards any investment criteria or guidelines with which such investor or its investments
are required to comply, whether by any present or future applicable law or regulations or by its own by-
laws or other governing rules or investment portfolio mandates, in particular with regard to any direct or
indirect environmental, sustainability or social impact of any projects or uses, the subject of or related to,
any Eligible Projects. No assurance is or can be given to investors that any projects or uses the subject of,
or related to, any Eligible Projects will meet any or all investor expectations regarding such "green",
"sustainable" or other equivalently-labelled performance objectives or that any adverse environmental
and/or other impacts will not occur during the implementation of any projects or uses the subject of, or
related to, any Green Projects. Also, the criteria for what constitutes a Eligible Project may be changed
from time to time.
In connection with the issue of green bonds and in particular with any Eligible Projects to fulfil any
environmental, sustainability, social and/or other criteria, opinions or certifications of third parties (whether
or not solicited by the Issuer) may be made available to the Issuer (such opinion or certification a "Third
Party Opinion"). For the avoidance of doubt, any such Third Party Opinion is not, nor shall be deemed to
be, incorporated in and/or form part of this Prospectus. Such Third Party Opinion provides an opinion on
certain environmental and related considerations and is not intended to address any credit, market or
other aspects of an investment in green bonds including without limitation market price, marketability,
                                                      23


investor preference or suitability of any security. Such Third Party Opinion is a statement of opinion, not a
statement of fact. Any such Third Party Opinion is not, nor should be deemed to be, a recommendation to
buy, sell or hold any such Notes. Any such Third Party Opinion is only current as of the date that opinion
was initially issued. Prospective investors must determine for themselves the relevance of any such Third
Party Opinion and/or the information contained therein and/or the provider of such Third Party Opinion for
the purpose of any investment in such Notes. Currently, the providers of such Third Party Opinions are not
subject to any specific regulatory or other regime or oversight. Neither the Issuer nor the Guarantor (as
applicable) are responsible for any Third Party Opinion or other third party assessment of the Green
Bonds. Nor is any Dealer responsible for any assessment of Green Bonds, or the monitoring of the use of
proceeds. No assurance or representation is given by the Issuer of the Guarantor (if applicable) as to the
suitability or reliability for any purpose whatsoever of any such Third Party Opinion. In particular, no
assurance or representation is made or given that any such Third Party Opinion reflects any present or
future requirements, investment criteria or guidelines which may apply to any investor or its investments.
Holders of Green Bonds will have no recourse against the provider(s) of any Third Party Opinion.
In the event that any of the green bonds are listed or admitted to trading on any dedicated "green",
"environmental", "sustainable" or other similarly labelled segment of any stock exchange or securities
market (whether or not regulated), or are included in any dedicated "green", "environmental", "sustainable"
or other equivalently-labelled index including without limitation the Luxembourg Green Exchange (“LGX”),
no representation or assurance is given by the Issuer, the Guarantor (if applicable) or any other person
that such listing or admission, or inclusion in such index, satisfies any present or future investor
expectations or requirements as regards any investment criteria or guidelines with which such investor or
its investments are required to comply, whether by any present or future applicable law or regulations or
by its own by-laws or other governing rules or investment portfolio mandates, in particular with regard to
any direct or indirect environmental, sustainability or social impact of any projects or uses, the subject of or
related to, any Eligible Projects. Furthermore, it should be noted that the criteria for any such listings or
admission to trading may vary from one stock exchange or securities market to another and also the
criteria for inclusion in such index may vary from one index to another. No representation or assurance
given or made by the Issuer, the Guarantor (if applicable) or any other person that any such listing or
admission to trading, or inclusion in any such index, will be obtained in respect of Green Bonds or, if
obtained, that any such listing or admission to trading, or inclusion in such index, will be maintained during
the life of Green Bonds.
While it is the intention of the Issuer to apply an amount equivalent to the proceeds of any Notes so
specified for Eligible Projects in, or substantially in, the manner described in the relevant Final Terms,
there can be no assurance that the relevant project(s) or use(s) the subject of, or related to, any Eligible
Projects will be capable of being implemented in or substantially in such manner and/or accordance with
any timing schedule and that accordingly such proceeds will be totally or partially disbursed for such
Eligible Projects. Nor can there be any assurance by the Issuer, the Guarantor (if applicable) or any other
person that such Eligible Projects will be completed within any specified period or at all or with the results
or outcome (whether or not related to the environment) as originally expected or anticipated by the Issuer
or that no adverse environmental, social and/or other events will occur during the implementation of any
Eligible Projects. Any such event or failure of the Issuer or the Guarantor (if applicable) to observe the
provisions set out in the Final Terms for the green bonds relating to the use of proceeds of the green
bonds or the Issuer's intentions as regards reporting, any negative change to, or withdrawal or suspension
of, any Third Party Opinion, the issuance of a new third party opinion or certification attesting that the
Issuer is not complying in whole or in part with any matters for which such opinion or certification is opining
or certifying on and/or any green bonds no longer being listed or admitted to trading on any stock
exchange or securities market as aforesaid will not constitute an Event of Default under the Notes but may
have a material adverse effect on the value of the green bonds and also potentially the value of any other
Notes which are intended to finance Eligible Projects and/or result in adverse consequences for certain
investors with portfolio mandates to invest in securities to be used for a particular purpose.
                                                     24


                     CONSENT TO THE USE OF THE PROSPECTUS
Each Dealer and/or each further financial intermediary subsequently reselling or finally placing Notes
issued under the Program is entitled to use the Prospectus in Germany, the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg,
the Republic of Austria, the Republic of Ireland, The Netherlands and Northern Ireland or such other
Member State whose competent authorities have been notified of the approval of this Prospectus for the
subsequent resale or final placement of the relevant Notes during the respective offer period (as
determined in the applicable Final Terms) during which subsequent resale or final placement of the
relevant Notes can be made, provided however, that the Prospectus is still valid in accordance with Article
12 (1) of the Prospectus Regulation. Each of BASF and BASF Finance accepts responsibility for the
information given in this Prospectus also with respect to such subsequent resale or final placement of the
relevant Notes.
The Prospectus may only be delivered to potential investors together with all supplements published
before such delivery. Any supplement to the Prospectus is available for viewing in electronic form on the
website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu) and on the website of BASF Group
(www.basf.com).
When using the Prospectus, each Dealer and/or relevant further financial intermediary must make certain
that it complies with all applicable laws and regulations in force in the respective jurisdictions, including
with the restrictions specified in the "PROHIBITION OF SALES TO EEA RETAIL INVESTORS" and the
"PROHIBITION OF SALES TO UK RETAIL INVESTORS" legends set out on the cover page of the
applicable Final Terms, if any.
In the event of an offer being made by a Dealer and/or a further financial intermediary the Dealer
and/or the further financial intermediary shall provide information to investors on the terms and
conditions of the Notes at the time of that offer.
Any Dealer and/or a further financial intermediary using the Prospectus shall state on its website
that it uses the Prospectus in accordance with this consent and the conditions attached to this
consent.
                                                   25


                          BASF SE AS ISSUER AND GUARANTOR

                                        STATUTORY AUDITORS
The following selected financial data for the years 2021 and 2020 are excerpted from the Consolidated
Financial Statements of BASF Group, which have been audited by KPMG AG
Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft ("KPMG"), THE SQUAIRE, Am Flughafen, 60549 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany, as the independent registered public accounting firm for BASF and for which unqualified
auditor's reports have been issued in each case, and financial data for the year 2022 from the unaudited
consolidated half-year financial statements of BASF Group as of June 30, 2022. KPMG is a member of the
Chamber of Public Accountants (Wirtschaftsprüferkammer, Körperschaft des öffentlichen Rechts). Starting
from January 1, 2004, the accounting and reporting of the BASF Group is performed according to
International Financial Reporting Standards ("IFRS").
For further information, please see Note 1 of the Consolidated Financial Statements 2021 and 2020
incorporated by reference into this Prospectus.
Investors should read the information below together with the consolidated financial statements of BASF
Group, including the notes and restatement remarks thereto, and the other financial information that is
included elsewhere in, or incorporated by reference into, this Prospectus.
The financial year of BASF Group is the calendar year.

                                 SELECTED FINANCIAL INFORMATION

                                             BASF GROUP


                                                 January 1, 2021 –                    January 1, 2020 –
                                                 December 31, 2021                   December 31, 2020
                                                                      million EUR
                                                                        audited
Sales                                                             78,598                           59,149
Income from operations before depreciation
and amortization (EBITDA)                                         11,355                             6,494
Income from operations (EBIT)                                      7,677                             (191)
Net income                                                         5,523                           (1,060)
Cash flows from operating activities                               7,245                             5,413

                                                         December 31, 2021               December 31, 2020
                                                                      million EUR
                                                                        audited
Total assets                                                      87,383                           80,292
Stockholders' equity                                              42,081                           34,398
Noncurrent liabilities                                            25,220                           29,614
Current liabilities                                               20,081                           16,280

                                                  January 1, 2022 -                  January 1, 2021 -
                                                   June 30, 2022                      June 30, 2021
                                                                       million EUR
                                                                        unaudited
Sales                                                              46,058                           39,153
Income from operations before depreciation
and amortization (EBITDA)1,                                         7,105                              6,375
Income from operations (EBIT)2,                                     5,135                              4,627
Net income                                                          3,311                              3,372
Cash flows from operating activities                                  938                              2,012

                                                    June 30, 2022                      June 30, 2021
                                                                       million EUR
                                                                        unaudited
Total assets                                                       96,972                           82,938
Stockholders' equity                                               46,373                           38,087
Noncurrent liabilities                                             23,966                           25,317
Current liabilities                                                26,633                           19,534
                                                               26



1
      "EBITDA" is defined as income from operations before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization. Depreciation and
      amortization include amortization and depreciation of, and valuation allowances (impairments and write-ups) on intangible
      assets and property, plant and equipment.
2
      "EBIT" is defined as income from operations before interest and taxes.




                               ALTERNATIVE PERFORMANCE MEASURES ("APM")
The Prospectus also uses the following alternative performance measures, not defined by IFRS, to
describe the BASF Group's results of operations. These should not be viewed in isolation, but treated as
supplementary information.
BASF uses ROCE as the most important key performance indicator for steering the BASF Group. EBIT
before special items and capex (capital expenditure) are key performance indicators for BASF that have a
direct impact on ROCE and as such, support its management.
Return on capital employed (ROCE) measures the profitability of the capital employed. ROCE is
calculated as the EBIT of the segments as a percentage of the average cost of capital basis at each
month-end.
The special items used below to calculate some alternative performance measures arise from the
integration of acquired businesses, restructuring measures, impairments, gains or losses resulting from
divestitures and sales of shareholdings, and other material expenses and income that generally do not
arise in conjunction with ordinary business activities.
Adjusting for special items makes EBIT before special items an especially suitable figure for illustrating the
development of operating business over time as well as for forecasts. It is therefore among the most
important performance measures for managing the BASF Group.
Income from operations before depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) describes operational
performance independently of age-related amortization and depreciation of assets and any valuation
allowances (impairments or write-ups).
The values for the respective APM for the first half of 2022/2021 are shown on page 6 of the H1 Report
2022. The values for the respective APM for the full year 2021/2020 are shown below.


Income from operations (EBIT) before special items (million EUR)

                                                                January 1, 2021 –                   January 1, 2020 –
                                                                December 31, 2021                  December 31, 2020
    Income from operations (EBIT)                                               7,677                               (191)
    Special items                                                                 (91)                            (3,751)
    EBIT before special items                                                   7,768                               3,560


Income from operations before depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) (million EUR)

                                                                January 1, 2021 –                   January 1, 2020 –
                                                                December 31, 2021                  December 31, 2020
    Income from operations (EBIT)                                               7,677                               (191)
    Depreciation, amortization, impairments and
    Reversals of impairments on property, plant
    and equipment and intangible assets                                              3,678                              6,685
    EBITDA                                                                          11,355                              6,494

Income from operations (EBIT) before special items (million EUR)

                                                                    January 1, 2022 –                January 1, 2021 –
                                                                      June 30, 2022                    June 30, 2021
    Income from operations (EBIT)                                                   5,135                            4,627
    Special items                                                                     (22)                             (49)
    EBIT before special items                                                       5,157                            4,676
                                                            27


Income from operations before depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) (million EUR)

                                                                  January 1, 2022 –             January 1, 2021 –
                                                                    June 30, 2022                 June 30, 2021
 Income from operations (EBIT)                                                    5,135                         4,627
 Depreciation and amortization                                                    1,970                         1,748
 EBITDA                                                                           7,105                         6,375


Return on capital employed (ROCE) (million EUR)

                                                                 January 1, 2021 –             January 1, 2020 –
                                                                 December 31, 2021             December 31, 2020
 EBIT of BASF Group                                                              7,677                          (191)
 EBIT of Other                                                                    (641)                       (1,203)
 EBIT of Segments                                                                8,317                          1,012
 Cost of capital basis of segments, average of
 month-end figures                                                              61,579                        60,111
 ROCE in %                                                                        13.5                           1.7


Capital employed (million EUR)

                                                           January 1, 2021 –              January 1, 2020 – December
                                                           December 31, 2021                       31, 2020
 Intangible assets                                                        13,143                               14,249
 Property, plant and equipment                                            19,280                               20,210
 Investments accounted for using the equity
 method                                                                        1,682                           1,395
 Inventories                                                                  11,459                          10,469
 Accounts receivables                                                         11,588                           9,379
 Current and noncurrent other receivables and
 other assets*                                                                 3,908                           3,149
 Assets of disposal groups                                                       520                           1,260
 Cost of capital basis of segments, average
 of month-end figures                                                         61,579                          60,111
 Deviation from cost of capital basis at closing
 rates as of December 31                                                       2,688                          (3,948)
 Assets not included in the cost of capital                                   23,115                          24,129
 Assets of the BASF Group as of Dec 31                                        87,383                          80,292

 * Including customer/supplier financing and other adjustments



                                    HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The audited consolidated financial statements of BASF Group for the fiscal year ending on December 31,
2020 and the auditors' report thereon, together contained in the BASF Report 2020 on pages 212-312, are
incorporated by reference into this Prospectus.
The audited consolidated financial statements of BASF Group for the fiscal year ending on December 31,
2021 and the auditors' report thereon, together contained in the BASF Report 2021 on pages 186-285, are
incorporated by reference into this Prospectus.
The unaudited consolidated interim financial statements of BASF Group as of June 30, 2022, contained in
the BASF Interim Report First Half 2022 on pages 24-49, are incorporated by reference into this
Prospectus.
                                                        28


                                GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT BASF SE

                             HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE ISSUER
On April 6, 1865, the Badische Anilin- & Sodafabrik ("Baden Aniline and Soda Factory") was founded in
Mannheim, Germany. BASF was incorporated as a stock corporation under the laws of Germany on
January 30, 1952 under the name "Badische Anilin- und Soda-Fabrik AG". In 1973, BASF changed its
name to BASF Aktiengesellschaft. BASF Aktiengesellschaft was registered until January 14, 2008 in the
commercial register (Handelsregister) of the local court (Amtsgericht) Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Germany,
under the entry number HRB 3000.
The Annual Shareholders' Meeting of BASF shareholders on April 26, 2007 approved the proposal of the
Board of Executive Directors and the Supervisory Board to convert BASF Aktiengesellschaft into a
European Company (Societas Europaea, SE) with the name BASF SE. BASF SE is registered as of
January 14, 2008 in the new legal form of a European Company (Societas Europaea, SE) in the
commercial register (Handelsregister) of the local court (Amtsgericht) of Ludwigshafen am Rhein,
Germany, under the entry number HRB 6000. As set forth in Art. 37 para. 2 of Council Regulation (EC) No.
2157/2001 of October 8, 2001 on the Statute for a European Company (SE) this conversion neither
resulted in the dissolution of the company nor in the establishment of a new legal person. Therefore,
through such conversion BASF SE is the same legal person as BASF Aktiengesellschaft.
The legal foundations of BASF SE’s corporate constitution are primarily the SE Council Regulation of the
European Union, the German SE Implementation Act and the German Stock Corporation Act. Despite
these new legal foundations, the previous fundamental elements of BASF Aktiengesellschaft's corporate
constitution remain unchanged in BASF SE: these are the two-tier system consisting of BASF's Board of
Executive Directors and the Supervisory Board, the equal representation of shareholders and employees
in the Supervisory Board and the shareholders' rights of co-administration and supervision at the Annual
Shareholders' Meeting.
BASF’s headquarter is located in Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Germany; its registered office is located at
Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Germany, telephone 0049-621-60-0. It operates under
German law. Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) of BASF is 529900PM64WH8AF1E917. The website of BASF is
www.basf.com. The information on this website does not form part of the Prospectus and has not been
scrutinised or approved by the Commission, unless specifically incorporated by reference into the
Prospectus.

Corporate purpose
Pursuant to Article 2 of its Articles of Association:
1.   The purpose of BASF is to engage in the following areas of activity:
        chemistry and related areas,
        agriculture and nutrition,
        extraction and production of and dealing in oil, natural gas, mineral oil products and energies,
        development and production of and dealing in products and the provision of services in the area
         of environmental technology,
     as well as the carrying out of any other activities incidental to the activity in said areas or conducive to
     promoting the same.
2.   BASF is authorized to establish branches both in Germany and abroad, and to establish and acquire
     business undertakings whose purposes are consistent with, related to or conducive to promoting the
     ones stipulated in No. 1, both in Germany and abroad, or to acquire interests therein.

Term and dissolution
BASF has been established for an indefinite period of time. BASF may be dissolved upon a resolution of
the Shareholders' Meeting requiring a majority of at least three quarters of the share capital represented
during the resolution. The assets of BASF remaining after servicing all liabilities are distributed among the
shareholders pro rata to their shareholding in BASF pursuant to the provisions of the German Stock
Corporation Act.
                                                     29


Share capital
As of the date of this Prospectus, the fully-paid share capital of BASF is unchanged since the date of the
last published unaudited financial statements as of June 30, 2022 and amounts to EUR 1,175,652,728.32
divided into 918,478,694.00 registered shares with no par value (Namensaktien) ("BASF Share(s)").
BASF SE held 18,505,079 treasury shares as of June 30, 2022, for redemption purposes.
All of the BASF Shares are ordinary registered shares. Shareholders are obliged to have themselves
registered with their shares into the company share register and to provide the information necessary for
registration in the share register according to the German Stock Corporation Act. Only the persons listed in
the share register are entitled to participate in the Annual Shareholders' Meetings and to vote as
shareholders. Each BASF Share represents one vote.
At the Annual Shareholders' Meeting of May 3, 2019, the shareholders authorized the Board or Executive
Directors, with the consent of the Supervisory Board, to increase, up to May 2, 2024, on a one-off basis or
in portions on a number of occasions, the company's subscribed capital by a total of up to
EUR 470,000,000 by issuing new registered shares against contributions in cash or in kind (Authorized
Capital). Shareholders are basically entitled to a subscription right. The new shares can be taken over by a
bank appointed by the Board of Executive Directors with instructions to offer them to the shareholders
(indirect subscription right). However, the Board of Executive Directors is authorized, with the consent of
the Supervisory Board, to exclude the statutory subscription right of the shareholders, in order to acquire
companies, parts of companies, or holdings in companies, in return for the transfer of shares in
appropriate individual cases, as far as this is necessary to prevent dilution in order to grant the owners of
option certificates and the creditors of convertible bonds that are issued by BASF or its affiliates in
connection with an authorization granted to the Board of Executive Directors by the Shareholders' Meeting,
a subscription right to the extent that this would be due to them after exercising the option or conversion
right or after fulfilling conversion obligations, and in order to use any residual amounts. In the case of
capital increases in return for cash contributions, the Board of Executive Directors is authorized to exclude
the statutory subscription right of shareholders, if the issue price of the new shares is not substantially
lower than the stock market price and the total number of shares issued under this authorization is not
more than 10% of the subscribed capital either at the time of the authorization coming into effect or – if this
value is lower – at the time that the present authorization is exercised.
At the Annual Shareholders' Meeting of April 29, 2022, shareholders authorized the Board of Executive
Directors, with the approval of the Supervisory Board, to issue, on a one-off basis or in portions on more
than one occasion, bearer or registered convertible bonds and/or bonds with warrants, or combinations of
these instruments, with or without maturity limitations up to a nominal value of EUR 10,000,000,000
through April 28, 2027. The calculated portion of the share capital represented by the BASF shares to be
issued in connection with the debt instruments issued under this authorization may not exceed 10% of
share capital. To this effect, share capital was increased conditionally by up to EUR 117,565,184 by
issuing a maximum of 91,847,800 new registered BASF shares. The conditional capital increase will only
be carried out to the extent to which holders of convertible bonds, or warrants attached to bonds with
warrants issued, exercise their conversion or option rights. Until now, this authorization has not been
exercised.
At the Annual Shareholders’ Meeting of April 29, 2022, The Board of Executive Directors was authorized
to buy back shares up to April 28, 2027, in an amount of up to 10% of BASF's share capital at the time that
the resolution was passed, or – in the event this amount is lower – of the share capital at the time that the
authorization is exercised. The acquired shares in combination with other shares BASF previously
acquired and still holds or shares attributable to the company in accordance with Sections 71a et seq. of
the German Stock Corporation Act may at no point exceed 10% of the share capital.
The shares are to be bought back at the discretion of the Board of Executive Directors (i) via the stock
exchange, (ii) via a public purchase offer addressed to all shareholders, (iii) via a public request to the
shareholders to submit sales offers or (iv) by other means in accordance with Section 53a of the German
Stock Corporation Act ((ii) and (iii) hereinafter referred to as "public acquisition offer").
On January 4, 2022, the Board of Executive Directors of BASF SE resolved on a share buyback program
with a volume of up to €3 billion which started on January 11, 2022, and is to be completed by December
2023. The share buyback program was initially based on the authorization by the Annual Shareholders’
Meeting on May 12, 2017. The program was continued after the renewed authorization to purchase own
shares had been granted by the Annual Shareholders’ Meeting of BASF SE on April 29, 2022. Around
18.5 million shares had been repurchased for almost €1.1 billion as of June 30,2022.
BASF Group continually reviews its businesses and aligns them to achieve profitable and sustainable
growth. BASF Group's significant recent acquisitions and divestitures are listed below:
                                                      30


Acquisitions / Divestitures
As of the date of this Prospectus, BASF Group acquired/formed joint ventures with the following
businesses:
   Together with Heraeus, Hanau, Germany, BASF announced on February 11, 2022, the formation of a
    joint venture (BASF: 50%; Heraeus: 50%) to recover precious metals from spent automotive catalysts.
    BASF HERAEUS (China) Metal Resource Co., Ltd., based in Pinghu, China, was formed in early May
    2022. Construction of the joint venture's recycling plant is scheduled to begin this year, with start of
    operations in 2023.
   On September 1, 2021, it was announced that BASF completed the purchase of 49.5% of Vattenfall's
    wind farm Hollandse Kust Zuid (HKZ). The purchase price was €0.3 billion. Including BASF's
    contribution to fund the wind farm construction, BASF's total commitment amounts to around €1.6
    billion.
   On August 31, 2021, following the approval of all relevant authorities, the new BASF and Shanshan
    joint venture "BASF Shanshan Battery Materials Co., Ltd" was formed. This BASF majority-owned joint
    venture (BASF: 51%; Shanshan: 49%) has been formed to produce cathode active materials (CAM)
    and precursors (PCAM) in China.
BASF Group divested / is in the process of divesting the following activities:
   On April 12, 2022, BASF completed the sale of a 25.2% interest in the Hollandse Kust Zuid wind farm
    to Allianz Capital Partners (on behalf of Allianz Insurance Companies). Since then, BASF’s remaining
    shares in the company holding the interest in the wind farm, HKZ Investor Holding B.V., have been
    accounted for using the equity method.
   On December 28, 2021, BASF reached an agreement with Clariant Corporation, Louisville, Kentucky,
    to sell its production site in Quincy, Florida, and the associated attapulgite business in the Dispersion &
    Resins division. The Quincy site employs around 75 employees and manufactures clay based mineral
    products used in a variety of industrial applications. The purchase price amounts to $60 million. The
    transaction is expected to close in the summer of 2022, subject to the approval of the relevant antitrust
    authorities.
   On November 30, 2021, BASF completed the sale of the precision microchemicals business to
    Entegris, Billerica, Massachusetts. The transaction included fixed assets and inventories; the purchase
    price was €78 million. The precision microchemicals business was part of the Surface Treatment
    business unit of BASF’s Coatings division, operating under the Chemetall brand.
   On November 18, 2021, BASF and KaMin LLC./CADAM S.A. (KaMin) signed an agreement to sell
    BASF’s kaolin minerals business to KaMin, a global performance minerals company headquartered in
    Macon, Georgia. Currently, the kaolin minerals business is part of BASF’s Performance Chemicals
    division. Pending approval by the relevant antitrust authorities, the transaction is expected to close in
    the second half of 2022.
   On November 9, 2021, BASF and Clayton, Dubilier & Rice sold their shares in Solenis to Platinum
    Equity, Beverly Hills, California. With over 5,200 employees, Solenis serves customers in water-
    intensive industries by helping them solve complex water treatment and process improvement
    challenges. BASF held a 49% share in Solenis after having transferred its wet-end paper and water
    chemicals business to the company in February 2019. This was accounted for using the equity method.
    The remaining 51% of the shares were held by funds managed by Clayton, Dubilier & Rice, and by
    Solenis management. The purchase price allocated to BASF was €1.1 billion. The investment was
    classified as non-integral. Its earnings and the gain on the disposal in the amount of €589 million were
    reported under net income from shareholdings.
   On June 30, 2021, BASF closed the divestiture of its global pigments business which BASF agreed to
    sell to DIC, Tokyo, Japan on August 29, 2019. The purchase price on a cash and debt-free basis was
    EUR 1.15 billion.
   On May 31, 2021, BASF concluded the sale of its manufacturing site in Kankakee, Illinois, to an affiliate
    of One Rock Capital Partners, LLC, a U.S.-based private equity firm. The agreement includes the
    associated businesses of vegetable-oil-based sterols and natural vitamin E as well as anionic
    surfactants and esters produced at the Kankakee site. The purchase price was €177 million. The
    transaction affected the Nutrition & Health and Care Chemicals divisions.
BASF financing policy remains unchanged:
BASF's financing policy aims to ensure BASF's solvency at all times, limiting the risks associated with
financing and optimizing its cost of capital. BASF preferably meets its external financing needs on the
                                                      31


international capital markets.
BASF strives to maintain a solid "A" rating, which ensures unrestricted access to financial and capital
markets. BASF's financing measures are aligned with its operational business planning as well as the
company's strategic direction and also ensure the financial flexibility to take advantage of strategic options.
BASF has solid financing. Corporate bonds form the basis of BASF's medium to long-term debt financing.
These are issued in euros and other currencies with different maturities as part of the €20 billion debt
issuance program. The goal is to create a balanced maturity profile, diversify BASF's investor base and
optimize its debt capital financing conditions.

Capitalization and financial indebtedness
The following table sets forth the consolidated capitalization of BASF Group as of December 31, 2021 and
June 30, 2022:

Stockholders' equity and liabilities (million EUR)
                                                                 June 30, 2022           December 31, 2021
                                                                   unaudited                  audited
Stockholders' equity
Subscribed capital                                                           1,176                     1,176
Capital reserves                                                             3,106                     3,106
Retained earnings                                                           39,529                    40,365
Other comprehensive income                                                   1,136                    (3,855)
Non-controlling interests                                                    1,426                     1,289


Noncurrent liabilities
Provisions for pensions and similar obligations                              3,102                     6,160
Other provisions                                                             1,803                     1,782
Tax provisions and deferred tax liabilities                                  1,857                     1,914
Financial indebtedness                                                      15,611                    13,764
Other liabilities                                                            1,593                     1,600


Current liabilities
Accounts payable, trade                                                      9,068                     7,826
Provisions                                                                   4,758                     3,935
Tax liabilities                                                              1,650                     1,161
Financial indebtedness                                                       7,922                     3,420
Other liabilities*                                                           3,191                     3,679
Liabilities of disposal groups                                                   43                       61


Total stockholders' equity and liabilities                                  96,972                    87,383

Consolidated statement of comprehensive income
Income and expense items (million EUR)
                                                               January 1, 2022 –         January 1, 2021 –
                                                                 June 30, 2022             June 30, 2021
                                                                   unaudited                 unaudited
Income after taxes                                                         3,500                     3,604


Remeasurement of defined benefit plans                                       3,076                     3,374
Deferred taxes on non-reclassifiable gains/losses                          (1,042)                     (868)
Non-reclassifiable gains/losses after taxes from equity-
accounted investments                                                          119                        41
                                                           32


Income and expense items (million EUR)
                                                                 January 1, 2022 –      January 1, 2021 –
                                                                   June 30, 2022          June 30, 2021
                                                                     unaudited              unaudited
Non-reclassifiable gains/losses                                              2,153                  2,547
Unrealized gains/losses in connection with cash flow
hedges                                                                           463                 (12)
Reclassification of realized gains/losses recognized in
the income statement                                                           (456)                 (10)
Unrealized gains/losses from currency translation                              1,531                 650
Reclassification of realized gains/losses from currency
translation recognized in the income statement                                     -                    52
Deferred taxes on reclassifiable gains/losses                                   (24)                    (1)
Investments accounted for using the equity method –
share of reclassifiable gains/losses (after taxes)                             1,450                   13
Reclassifiable gains/losses                                                    2,963                  692


Other comprehensive income after taxes                                         5,116                3,239
Comprehensive income                                                           8,617                6,843


The following table sets forth the consolidated capitalization of BASF Group as of December 31, 2021 and
December 31, 2020:

Stockholders' equity and liabilities (million EUR)
                                                                December 31, 2021        December 31,
                                                                                             2020
                                                                     audited                audited
Stockholders' equity
Subscribed capital                                                           1,176                  1,176
Capital reserves                                                             3,106                  3,115
Retained earnings                                                          40,365                 37,911
Other comprehensive income                                                 (3,855)                (8,474)
Non-controlling interest                                                     1,289                    670

Noncurrent liabilities
Provisions for pensions and similar obligations                                6,160               8,566
Other provisions                                                               1,782               1,484
Tax provisions and deferred tax liabilities                                 1,914                  2,034
Financial indebtedness                                                     13,764                 15,819
Other liabilities                                                           1,600                  1,711

Current liabilities
Accounts payable, trade                                                        7,826               5,291
Provisions                                                                     3,935               2,825
Tax liabilities                                                                1,161                 988
Financial indebtedness                                                         3,420               3,395
Other liabilities                                                              3,679               3,440
Liabilities of disposal groups                                                    61                 341

Total stockholders’ equity and liabilities                                 87,383                 80,292

 Contingent liabilities (million EUR)                           December 31, 2021      December 31, 2020
                                                                     audited                audited
 Bills of exchange                                                              3                      2
 Guarantees                                                                   383                    347
 Warranties                                                                    58                     79
 Collateral granted on behalf of third-party liabilities                        1                       -
                                                          33


    Total                                                                     445                       428

    Income and expense items (million EUR)
                                                                 January 1, 2021 –       January 1, 2020 –
                                                                December 31, 2021       December 31, 2020
                                                                     audited                 audited
    Income after taxes                                                        5,982                  (1,075)

    Remeasurement of defined benefit plans                                   3,476                    (1,376)
    Deferred taxes on non-reclassifiable gains/losses                        (811)                        422
    Non-reclassifiable gains/losses after taxes from equity-
    accounted investments                                                       44                       (19)
    Non-reclassifiable gains/losses                                          2,709                      (973)

    Unrealized gains/losses from cash flow hedges                              284                         14
    Reclassifications of realized gains/losses recognized in
    the income statement                                                     (222)                         65
    Unrealized gains/losses from currency translation                        1,566                    (1,612)
    Reclassification of realized gains/losses from currency
    translation recognized in the statement of income                            52                       71
    Deferred taxes for gains/losses that can be reclassified                   (29)                       (5)
    Reclassifiable gains/losses after taxes from equity-
    accounted shareholdings                                                    313                    (1,286)
    Reclassifiable gains / losses                                            1,964                    (2,753)
    Other comprehensive income after tax                                     4,673                    (3,726)

    Comprehensive income                                                    10,655                    (4,801)

Dividend policy
The Board of Executive Directors and the Supervisory Board of BASF propose dividends based on BASF
SE's year-end unconsolidated financial statements. The proposal is then voted on at BASF's Annual
Shareholders' Meeting. The Annual Shareholders' Meeting is usually convened during the second quarter
of each year. BASF aims to increase its dividend each year.


                                         ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
BASF SE is the largest operating company and the ultimate parent company of the BASF Group. BASF
Group is a transnational chemical company that comprises the parent company and 267 fully consolidated
subsidiaries including BASF SE as of December 31, 2021. In addition, nine joint operations are
consolidated on a proportional basis, and 24 companies are accounted for using the equity method.
BASF has eleven divisions grouped into six segments as follows:
     Chemicals: Petrochemicals and Intermediates
     Materials: Performance Materials and Monomers
     Industrial Solutions: Dispersions & Resins and Performance Chemicals
     Surface Technologies: Catalysts & Coatings
     Nutrition & Care: Care Chemicals and Nutrition & Health
     Agricultural Solutions: Agricultural Solutions
In line with BASF’s corporate strategy, the operating divisions, service units, the regions and a Corporate
Center have formed the cornerstones of the BASF organization since January 1, 2020. BASF's divisions
bear operational responsibility here and are organized according to sectors or products. They manage
BASF’s 50 global and regional business units and develop strategies for the 75 strategic business units.
The regional and country units represent BASF locally and support the growth of business units with local
proximity to customers. For financial reporting purposes, BASF organize the regional divisions into four
regions: Europe; North America; Asia Pacific; South America / Africa / Middle East. Research activities
that are relevant to several operating divisions are bundled in one central research division. This division is
globally organized with research centers in Europe, North America and Asia Pacific. Together with the
research and development units in BASF's operating divisions, it forms the core of the global Know-How
Verbund. Five service units provide competitive services for the operating divisions and sites: Global
                                                      34


Engineering Services; Global Digital Services; Global Procurement; European Site & Verbund
Management; Global Business Services (finance; human resources; environmental protection, health and
safety; intellectual property; communications; procurement, supply chain and inhouse consulting services).
The Corporate Center supports the Board of Executive Directors in steering the company as a whole.
These include central tasks from the following areas: strategy; finance and controlling; compliance and
law; tax; environmental protection, health and safety; human resources; communications; investor
relations and internal audit.

Management and Supervisory Bodies

General
In accordance with the maintained two-tier administrative system, BASF has a Board of Executive
Directors (Vorstand) and a Supervisory Board (Aufsichtsrat). The two boards are separate, and no
individual is simultaneously a member of both boards.
The Board of Executive Directors is responsible for managing the business of BASF in accordance with
the German Stock Corporation Act and BASF's Articles of Association. The Board of Executive Directors
also represents BASF in its dealings with third parties and in court.
The principal function of the Supervisory Board is to appoint and supervise the Board of Executive
Directors. The Supervisory Board may not make management decisions, but BASF's Articles of
Association or the Supervisory Board itself may require the prior consent of the Supervisory Board for
certain types of transactions.
Members of both the Board of Executive Directors and the Supervisory Board owe a duty of loyalty and
care to BASF. In exercising these duties, the applicable standard of care is that of a diligent and prudent
business person. Members of both boards must take into account a broad range of considerations when
making decisions, foremost the interests of BASF, including its shareholders, employees and creditors
and, to a certain extent, the interests of society. The members of the Board of Executive Directors and the
Supervisory Board are personally liable to BASF for breaches of their duties of loyalty and care.
None of the members of the Supervisory Board or the Board of Executive Directors of BASF have any
conflicts of interests between any duties to BASF and their private interests or other duties. The members
of the Supervisory Board and of the Board of Executive Directors can be contacted at the address of the
headquarters of BASF.

Board of Executive Directors
The number of members of the Board of Executive Directors is determined by the Supervisory Board,
subject to a minimum of two members. As of the date of this Prospectus, BASF's Board of Executive
Directors has six members.
Pursuant to the Articles of Association of BASF, any two members of the Board of Executive Directors or
one member and the holder of a special power of attorney (Prokura) may legally bind BASF.
The Board of Executive Directors must report regularly to the Supervisory Board on the current business
of BASF, on its business policies and other fundamental matters regarding the future conduct of its
business, on its profitability, particularly on its return on equity, on the risk exposure of BASF and the risk
management, as well as on any exceptional matters that may arise from time to time. The Supervisory
Board is also entitled to request special reports at any time.
The Supervisory Board appoints members to the Board of Executive Directors for a maximum term of five
years. Members of the Board of Executive Directors may be re-appointed (even prior to the expiration of
her or his term) or have their terms extended for one or more terms. Each re-appointment or extension
shall have a maximum term of five years.
Under certain circumstances, such as a serious breach of duty or a bona fide vote of no confidence by a
majority of votes at a Shareholders' Meeting, a member of the Board of Executive Directors may be
removed by the Supervisory Board prior to the expiration of her or his term. A member of the Board of
Executive Directors may not deal with or vote on matters relating to proposals, arrangements or contracts
between that member and BASF.
The Articles of Association of BASF require decisions of the Board of Executive Directors to be made by a
simple majority unless the law requires a larger majority. In case of a tie, the chairman has the casting
vote.
                                                   35


The following table shows the current members of BASF's Board of Directors and a list of responsibilities
of outside directorships:


 Name                             Main Area of Responsibility             Membership on supervisory
                                                                          and advisory boards
 Dr. Martin Brudermüller          Chairman of the Board of Executive      Member of the Supervisory
                                  Directors, responsible for Corporate    Board of Mercedes-Benz AG
                                  Legal, Compliance & Insurance;          , Member of the Supervisory
                                  Corporate Development; Corporate        Board of Mercedes-Benz
                                  Communications & Government             Group AG
                                  Relations; Corporate Human
                                  Resources; Corporate Investor
                                  Relations
 Dr. Hans-Ulrich Engel            Vice Chairman of the Board and          Chairman of the Supervisory
                                  Chief Financial Officer, responsible    Board of Wintershall AG,
                                  for Corporate Finance; Corporate        Chairman of the Supervisory
                                  Audit; Corporate Taxes & Duties;        Board of Wintershall Dea AG
                                  Global Business Services; Global        and member of the
                                  Digital Services; Global                Shareholders’ Committee of
                                  Procurement                             Nord Stream AG
 Michael Heinz                    Responsible for Agricultural            Member of the Supervisory
                                  Solutions, Care Chemicals,              Board of Wintershall Dea AG
                                  Nutrition & Health, Region North
                                  America and South
                                  America
 Dr. Markus Kamieth               Responsible for Catalysts,              Member of the Board of
                                  Coatings, Dispersions & Resins,         Directors of Solenis UK
                                  Performance Chemicals, Greater          International Ltd. (until
                                  China, South & East Asia, ASEAN         December 31, 2021)
                                  & Australia/New Zealand, Mega
                                  Projects Asia
 Dr. Melanie Maas-Brunner         Responsible for Corporate               Chairwoman of the
                                  Environmental Protection, Health &      Administrative Council of
                                  Safety, European Site & Verbund         BASF Antwerpen N.V.
                                  Management, Global Engineering
                                  Services, Advanced Materials &
                                  Systems Research, Bioscience
                                  Research, Process Research &
                                  Chemical Engineering, BASF New
                                  Business
 Saori Dubourg                    Responsible for Monomers,               Member of the Supervisory
                                  Performance                             Board of Wintershall Dea AG
                                  Materials, Petrochemicals,
                                  Intermediates, Region Europe

Supervisory Board
In accordance with the Articles of Association, the Supervisory Board of BASF SE comprises twelve
members. Pursuant to Sec. 35 para. 1 of the German Act on the Participation of Employees in a European
Company (Gesetz über die Beteiligung der Arbeitnehmer in einer Europäischen Gesellschaft, SEBG) and
the Agreement Concerning the Involvement of Employees in BASF SE (Employee Participation
Agreement) signed on November 15, 2007 by the company management and the representatives of BASF
Group's European employees, seats on the Supervisory Board are accorded following the principle of
parity. The six shareholder representatives on the Supervisory Board of BASF SE are elected by the
Shareholders' Meeting. By way of derogation from Sec. 40 (2) of the Council Regulation (EC)
No. 2157/2001, the six employee representatives are not elected by the Shareholders' Meeting, but
appointed by the representative body of the employees, the BASF Europa Betriebsrat, in accordance with
the Employee Participation Agreement. The term of office of the Supervisory Board commenced following
the Annual Shareholders' Meeting on May 3, 2019, in which the shareholder representatives on the
Supervisory Board were elected. It terminates upon conclusion of the Annual Shareholders' Meeting,
                                                     36


which resolves on the discharge of members of the Supervisory Board for the fourth complete financial
year after the term of office commenced; this is the Annual Shareholders' Meeting in 2024.
On April 29, 2022, the Annual Shareholders’ Meeting of BASF SE elected Alessandra Genco (48), Chief
Financial Officer of Leonardo SpA, Rome, Italy, and Professor Dr. Stefan Asenkerschbaumer (66),
chairman of the supervisory board of Robert Bosch GmbH and managing partner of Robert Bosch
Industrietreuhand KG, Stuttgart, Germany, to the Supervisory Board of BASF SE as new shareholder
representatives. They succeed Anke Schäferkordt (59) and Franz Fehrenbach (72), who stepped down
from the Supervisory Board as of the end of the Annual Shareholders’ Meeting 2022 due to their many
years of service on the Board. The mandates run until the end of the Annual Shareholders’ Meeting 2024.
In addition, as of the end of the Annual Shareholders’ Meeting 2022, Peter Zaman (53), deputy secretary
of the Works Council of BASF Antwerpen NV, André Matta (51), member of the BASF Works Council
Europe and the Works Council of BASF SE, and Natalie Mühlenfeld (41), district manager of the Mining,
Chemical and Energy Industries Union (IG BCE) for the Düsseldorf district, joined the Supervisory Board
of BASF SE as new employee representatives. They succeed Denise Schellemans (60), Waldemar Helber
(64) and Roland Strasser (46), who resigned their mandates as of the end of the Annual Shareholders’
Meeting 2022. Their mandates on the Supervisory Board of BASF SE also run until the end of the Annual
Shareholders’ Meeting 2024.
Any Supervisory Board member elected by the shareholders at BASF's Shareholders' Meeting may be
removed by a resolution of the Shareholders' Meeting. Any board member elected by the employees may
be removed upon request of the employees. The Supervisory Board appoints a chairman and one or more
deputy chairmen from among its members. According to Art. 42 sentence 2 SE Regulation, it is mandatory
that the chairman of the Supervisory Board is a shareholder representative. The chairman is appointed
with the majority of the votes of the members present or represented. In order to ensure that this principle
is adhered to for the election of the chairman, it is stipulated in Article 11 No. 1 of the Articles of
Association of BASF SE that during the election of the chairman of the Supervisory Board the oldest
member in terms of age of the shareholder representative acts as the chairman and has therefore the
casting vote. Pursuant to the agreement concerning the involvement of employees in BASF SE, one of the
deputy chairmen shall be elected at the proposal of the employee representatives. Compensation for
Supervisory Board members is determined by BASF's Articles of Association.
At least half of the total required number of members of the Supervisory Board must be present or
participate in decision-making to constitute a quorum. Unless otherwise provided for by law or BASF's
Articles of Association, resolutions are passed by a simple majority of the votes cast. In the event of a tie,
the chairman has a casting vote.
The following table shows the current members of BASF's Supervisory Board at the date of this
Prospectus and their principal occupation:

Name                                Principal occupation

Dr. Kurt Bock                       Chairman of the Supervisory Board of BASF SE
Chairman
Sinischa Horvat(1)                  Chairman of the BASF Works Council Europe;
Vice Chairman                       Chairman of the Joint Works Council of BASF Group;
                                    Chairman of the Works Council of BASF SE, Ludwigshafen Site
Dr. Stefan Asenkerschbaumer         Chairman of the supervisory board of Robert Bosch GmbH
                                    Managing partner of Robert Bosch Industrietreuhand KG
Prof. Dr. Thomas Carell             Professor for Organic Chemistry at Ludwig Maximilians University
                                    Munich
Tatjana Diether(1)                  Deputy Chairwoman of the Works Council of BASF SE, Ludwigshafen
                                    Site and member of the BASF Works Council Europe
Dame Alison J. Carnwath DBE         Senior Advisor Evercore Partners
Liming Chen                         Chairman of IBM Greater China Group
André Matta(1)                      Member of the Works Council Europe and the Works Council of BASF
                                    SE, Ludwigshafen Site
Natalie Mühlenfeld(1)               Chairwoman of the Mining, Chemical and Energy Industries Union (IG
                                    BCE)
Alessandra Genco                    Chief Financial Officer of Leonardo SpA
Peter Zaman(1)                      Deputy secretary of the Works Council of BASF Antwerpen NV
                                                                37



Name                                        Principal occupation

Michael Vassiliadis(1)                      Chairman of the Mining, Chemical and Energy Industries Union (IG
                                            BCE)
(1)       Employee representative

BASF SE's Supervisory Board established a total of four Supervisory Board Committees: The Personnel
Committee, the Audit Committee, the Nomination Committee and the Strategy Committee.

Employees
As of December 31, 2021, the number of employees increased to 111,047 employees compared with
110,302 employees as of December 31, 2020. The rise was primarily due to staff increases in Asia
Pacific, especially in connection with the formation of BASF Shanshan Battery Materials Co., Ltd., as
well as for the new Verbund site in Zhanjiang, China. The divestiture of the pigments business, which
comprised around 2,500 employees, had an offsetting impact. The BASF Group’s expenses for
wages and salaries, social security contributions and pensions and assistance in 2021 totaled
€11,097 million (2020: €10,576 million). The rise in personnel expenses in 2021 was mainly due to
higher bonus provisions. Particularly the lower average number of employees had an offsetting impact.

The following table details BASF Group's workforce on a regional basis as of December 31, 2021
and 2020, respectively:
                                                                                     2021                          2020
         Europe                                                                         67,532                        68,849
           Thereof Germany                                                              51,026                        51,961
         North America                                                                  16,753                        16,948
         Asia Pacific                                                                   19,976                        17,753
         South America, Africa, Middle East                                              6,786                          6,752
         Total                                                                         111,047                       110,302

Credit ratings1,2
S&P Global Ratings Europe Limited ("S&P") 3 has assigned the long-term credit rating "A" 4 (outlook
negative) to BASF. Moody's Deutschland GmbH ("Moody's") 5 , has assigned an "A3"6 rating (outlook
stable). Fitch Ratings Ireland Limited ("Fitch")7 has assigned an "A" rating (outlook stable)8.




1
      The European Securities and Markets Authority publishes on its website (https://www.esma.europa.eu/supervision/credit-
      rating-agencies/risk) a list of credit rating agencies registered in accordance with the CRA Regulation. That list is updated
      within five working days following the adoption of a decision under Article 16, 17 or 20 CRA Regulation. The European
      Commission shall publish that updated list in the Official Journal of the European Union within 30 days following such
      update.
2
      A credit rating assesses the creditworthiness of an entity and informs an investor therefore about the probability of the
      entity being able to redeem invested capital. It is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be revised
      or withdrawn by the rating agency at any time.
3
      S&P is established in the European Community and is registered under Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 of the European
      Parliament and of the Council of September 16, 2009 on credit rating agencies, as amended (the "CRA Regulation").
4
      S&P has assigned the long-term credit rating A (outlook negative) to BASF, which indicates that the Issuer has a strong
      capacity to meet its financial commitments but is somewhat susceptible to adverse economic conditions and change in
      circumstances. The "negative" outlook reflects that S&P may lower the rating in the next 6 to 24 months.
5
      Moody's is established in the European Community and is registered under the CRA Regulation.
6
      Moody's has assigned an "A3" rating (outlook stable) which means that obligations of the Issuer are judged to be upper-
      medium grade and are subject to low default risk and that the Issuer has a strong ability to repay short-term debt
      obligations.
7
      Fitch is established in the European Community and is registered under the CRA Regulation.
8
      Fitch has assigned the long-term credit rating A (outlook stable) to BASF, which indicates that the Issuer has a strong
      capacity to meet its financial commitments but is somewhat vulnerable to adverse business or economic conditions.
                                                      38


        BUSINESS OVERVIEW – PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES AND PRINCIPAL MARKETS

Introduction
With around 111,000 employees, six Verbund sites and 232 additional production sites worldwide BASF
Group supports customers and partners in almost every country in the world. The portfolio ranges from
chemicals, plastics, performance products to crop protection products.
For the year ended December 31, 2021, BASF Group reported sales of €78,598 million and income from
operations before special items of €7,768 million.
Markets and sites
BASF has companies in more than ninety countries and supplies products to a large number of business
partners in nearly every part of the world. In 2021, BASF Group achieved 38.8% of its sales with
customers in Europe. In addition, 26.5% of sales were generated in North America; 27.0% in Asia Pacific;
and 7.6% in South America, Africa and Middle East. BASF Group operates six Verbund sites as well as
232 additional production sites worldwide. The Verbund site in Ludwigshafen is one of the largest
integrated chemical complexes in the world. This was where the concept of integrated production facilities
(the "Verbund") was developed and continuously optimized before it was applied to other sites around the
world.
The Production Verbund, for example, intelligently links production plants and thereby creates efficient
value chains from basic chemicals right through to high value-added products such as aroma chemicals or
crop protection products. In addition, by-products from one plant can be used as raw materials elsewhere.
With this closely interlinked production system, BASF Group saves raw materials and energy costs.
Another important part of the Verbund concept is the Energy Verbund, in which steam from production
processes is not discharged into the environment but is captured to be used as an energy source at other
production plants, thus making a major contribution to energy efficiency.
Organization of BASF Group
BASF's activities have been grouped into six segments: Chemicals, Materials, Industrial Solutions,
Surface Technologies, Nutrition & Care and Agricultural Solutions. BASF's divisions bear operational
responsibility and are organized according to sectors or products. They manage BASF's 50 global and
regional business units and develop strategies for the 75 strategic business units. For detailed information
please refer to chapter "organizational structure".
BASF Group strategy
BASF's aspiration is to be the world's leading chemical company for its customers, grow profitably and
create value for society. With BASF's updated corporate strategy, which was announced in November
2018, BASF is targeting profitable growth. BASF aims to grow organically and thus will strengthen its
customer focus. The Asian market plays an important role in BASF's growth strategy. With a share of
more than 45%, China is already the largest chemical market and drives the growth of global chemical
production. By 2030, China's share will increase to over 50%, and BASF wants to participate in this growth.
To drive forward BASF's growth in this market, BASF plans to build an integrated Verbund site in
Zhanjiang in the southern Chinese province of Guangdong. In July 2022, BASF made the final investment
decision for the main construction phase of the Zhanjiang Verbund site, covering the heart of the Verbund
including a steam cracker and downstream plants. This phase is targeted to start up in late 2025. The first
plants started construction in 2020, and BASF made further progress on these in 2021. On September 6,
2022, BASF inaugurated the first plant of its Zhanjiang Verbund site. BASF also wants to expand its
existing joint venture with Sinopec in Nanjing by 2023.
BASF Strategic Targets
BASF wants to grow faster than the market, further increase profitability, achieve a return on capital
employed (ROCE) considerably above the cost of capital percentage and increase the dividend per share
every year based on a strong free cash flow. In addition to these financial targets, BASF pursues broad
sustainability targets. For example, the new BASF 2030 goal is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
its production sites and energy purchases worldwide by 25% compared with 2018 while growing
production volumes. BASF wants to strengthen the sustainability focus of its product portfolio and will
update its portfolio steering targets in 2022. BASF also strives to strengthen the sustainability of its supply
chains and use resources responsibly. BASF wants to further improve safety in production. In addition,
BASF aims to promote diversity within the company and create a working environment in which its
employees feel that they can thrive and perform at their best.
The objective of these targets is to steer the business into a sustainable future, and at the same time,
contribute to the implementation of the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). BASF is
                                                     39


focusing on issues where it as a company can make a significant contribution, such as climate protection,
sustainable consumption and production, and fighting hunger.
Profitable growth
   Grow sales volumes faster than global chemical production every year
   Increase EBITDA before special items by 3% to 5% per year
   Achieve a return on capital employed (ROCE) considerably above the cost of capital percentage every
    year
   Increase the dividend per share every year based on a strong free cash flow
Effective climate protection
   Reduce absolute CO2 emissions by 25% by 2030 compared with 2018
   Achieve net zero CO2 emissions by 2050
Sustainable product portfolio
   Achieve €22 billion in Accelerator sales by 2025 (that target was already achieved in 2021; BASF will
    adjust its portfolio steering target over the course of 2022)
Responsible procurement
   Cover 90% of BASF's relevant spend with sustainability evaluations by 2025
   Have 80% of BASF's suppliers improve their sustainability performance upon re-evaluation
Resource efficiency and safe production
   Reduce worldwide process safety incidents per 200,000 working hours to ≤0.1 by 2025
   Reduce the worldwide lost-time injury rate per 200,000 working hours to ≤0.1 by 2025
   Introduce sustainable water management at all production sites in water stress areas and at all
    Verbund sites by 2030
Employee engagement and diversity
   Increase the proportion of women in leadership positions with disciplinary responsibility to 30% by 2030
   More than 80% of employees feel that at BASF, they can thrive and perform at their best
BASF's journey to climate neutrality
The new Net Zero Accelerator unit started work on January 1, 2022. It bundles the extensive cross-
company activities with which BASF wants to achieve its ambitious climate protection targets. The unit will
initially have around 80 employees and report directly to the Chariman of the Board of Executive Directors.
It will focus on accelerating and implementing projects relating to low-CO2 production technologies,
circular economy and renewable energies – driving forward BASF's transformation to a climate-neutral
company. In parallel, BASF's operating divisions will continue to work on divisional-specific carbon
reduction projects.
BASF's strategic action areas
BASF has defined a number of strategic action areas through which it will sharpen its customer focus.
Innovation
Innovation is the bedrock of BASF's success. BASF is an innovation leader in the chemical industry, with
around 10,000 employees in research and development and R&D spending of around €2.2 billion. BASF is
expanding this position by strengthening specific research activities, for example in battery materials,
polymer technologies, catalyst processes or biotechnological methods. In addition, BASF is bringing
research and development even closer together, incorporating its customers’ requirements into its
innovation processes even earlier and more intensively, and expanding cooperation with customers,
universities, research institutions and other partners. To further strengthen its innovation power, BASF will
reorganize its global research activities in 2022 and bundle them in a global research unit based in
Ludwigshafen, Germany.
BASF’s innovation pipeline is geared to sustainability – especially climate protection and the circular
economy. This lays the foundation for future growth: BASF is working intensively on fundamental
innovations for products, processes and business models, for example in the chemical recycling of plastics,
battery and catalyst technologies, low-carbon production of basic chemicals, and digital, more
                                                     40


environmentally friendly agriculture. At the same time, BASF is driving forward product improvements in all
business units that offer its customers sustainability and competitive advantages, such as in lightweight
construction and surface solutions for the automotive industry, bio-based and biodegradable active
ingredients for the cosmetics, detergent and cleaner industries, and energy-efficient building materials.
Sustainability
BASF pledged its commitment to sustainability in 1994 and since then, have systematically aligned its
activities with the principles of sustainability. BASF wants to further strengthen its position as a thought
leader in sustainability. BASF sees sustainability as an integral part of its strategy as well as its targets,
steering processes and business models. This establishes BASF as a responsible and attractive partner
supporting its customers, opens up new growth areas and secures the long-term success of the company.
BASF’s approach covers the entire value chain – from responsible procurement and safety and resource
efficiency in production to sustainable solutions for its customers.
Production
BASF is committed to running its production safely, efficiently and reliably so that BASF can deliver
products to its customers on spec and on time. BASF aims to further improve the reliability and availability
of its plants, as well as its agility. Above and beyond this, continuous process improvements and effective
debottlenecking of BASF's existing asset base are paramount to ensure BASF's competitiveness.
Digitalization
BASF wants to leverage the diverse growth potential of digitalization and seize the associated
opportunities to the benefit of its customers. To achieve this, BASF promotes digital skills among its
employees, cooperate with partners and make digital technologies and ways of working an integral part of
its business. For example, BASF had introduced augmented reality solutions at 340 plants worldwide as of
the end of 2021. BASF plans to implement these at more than 80 other plants by the end of 2022.
Portfolio
The acquisitions and divestitures made in the past few years have oriented BASF’s portfolio even more
strongly toward innovation-driven growth areas. In 2021, BASF successfully integrated the polyamide
business acquired from Solvay, further strengthening its position in engineering plastics. BASF closed the
divestiture of its pigments business to the fine chemicals company DIC as planned in the first half of 2021.
The sale of BASF’s shareholding in Solenis to Platinum Equity was also completed as planned in
November 2021. BASF intends to close the divestiture of its kaolin minerals business to KaMin,
announced in November 2021, in the second half of 2022, subject to the approval of the relevant merger
control authorities. For further information see "Recent Events" below.
Employees
BASF’s employees are key to its success. That is why BASF believes that it is important to have an
inspiring working environment that fosters and develops employees’ individual talents and enables them
and their teams to perform at their best. BASF is pursuing three action areas to make its high-performance
organization even more so: empowerment, differentiation and simplification. At the same time, BASF
encourages and promotes a leadership culture that empowers its employees to respond to customer
needs quickly and efficiently with a solution orientation. BASF values diversity in people, opinions and
experience as being crucial to creativity and innovation.
Corporate Values
BASF maintains its four core values – creative, open, responsible, entrepreneurial.
Creative: BASF makes great products and solutions for its customers. This is why BASF embraces bold
ideas and give them space to grow. BASF acts with optimism and inspire one another.
Open: BASF values diversity, in people, opinions and experience. This is why BASF fosters feedback
based on honesty, respect and mutual trust. BASF learns from its setbacks.
Responsible: BASF values the health and safety of people above all else. BASF makes sustainability part
of every decision. BASF is committed to strict compliance and environmental standards.
Entrepreneurial: BASF focuses on its customers, as individuals and as a company. BASF seizes
opportunities and think ahead. BASF takes ownership and embrace personal accountability.
Global standards
BASF's standards fulfill or exceed existing laws and regulations and take internationally recognized
principles into account. BASF respects and promotes:
                                                     41


   The 10 principles of the U.N. Global Compact
   The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the two U.N. Human Rights Covenants
   The core labor standards of the ILO and the Tripartite Declaration of Principles Concerning
    Multinational Enterprises and Social Policy (MNE Declaration)
   The OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises
   The Responsible Care® Global Charter
   The German Corporate Governance Code
BASF stipulates rules for its employees with standards that apply throughout the Group. BASF sets itself
goals with voluntary commitments and monitor its performance in terms of environmental protection,
health and safety using BASF's Responsible Care Management System. In terms of labor and social
standards, this takes place using three elements: The Compliance Program (including the compliance
hotlines, which can be used for internal and external questions or complaints), close dialog with BASF's
stakeholders (such as with employee representatives or international organizations), and the global
management process to respect international labor norms.
BASF's business partners are expected to comply with prevailing laws and regulations and to align their
actions with internationally recognized principles. BASF has established appropriate monitoring systems to
ensure this.
Value-Based Management
From the 2019 business year onward, the return on capital employed (ROCE) replaced EBIT after cost of
capital as the most important key performance indicator for steering the BASF Group. ROCE already
replaced the return on assets as the metric for variable compensation in 2018.
The BASF Group's steering concept
From the 2019 business year onward, EBIT after cost of capital was replaced by the return on capital
employed (ROCE). This is calculated as the EBIT generated by the segments as a percentage of the
average cost of capital basis. As stated in BASF's strategic goals, BASF aims to achieve a ROCE above
the cost of capital percentage every year.
Value-based management throughout the company
EBIT before special items and capex (capital expenditure) are key performance indicators for BASF that
have a direct impact on ROCE and as such, support BASF's management.
EBIT before special items is used to steer profitability at Group and segment level. Capex is used to
manage capital employed in the BASF Group. Capex is not just relevant to ROCE management, but also
supports BASF's long-term goal to increase BASF's dividend each year based on a strong free cash flow.
Furthermore, BASF will continue to comment on and forecast sales at Group and segment level in its
financial reporting as a significant driver for EBIT before special items and thus ROCE.
BASF's nonfinancial targets are focused more on the long term. As part of the implementation of BASF's
strategy, BASF is investigating the possibility of establishing short-term steering mechanisms for its
nonfinancial targets as well.
Integration of Sustainability
Strategy
BASF has defined sustainability focus areas in its corporate strategy to position itself in the market and at
the same time, meet the growing challenges along the value chain:
   BASF sources responsibly
   BASF produces safely for people and the environment
   BASF produces efficiently
   BASF values people and treat them with respect
   BASF drives sustainable products and solutions
Relevant topics resulting from these commitments – such as energy and climate protection, portfolio
management, supply chain responsibility, employee engagement, resource efficiency, responsible
production and water – form the focal points of BASF's reporting. BASF integrates these topics into its
long-term steering processes to increase societal acceptance and take advantage of business
                                                      42


opportunities. Here, BASF considers three dimensions of materiality: The relevance of sustainability topics
to its business, the impacts of its business activities along the value chain on sustainability topics, and how
important these topics are to its stakeholders.
Portfolio steering based on sustainability performance
A significant steering tool for the product portfolio, based on the sustainability performance of BASF’s
products, is the Sustainable Solution Steering method. It considers BASF’s products’ applications in
various markets and customer industries. Transparently classifying BASF’s products on the basis of their
contribution to sustainability enables BASF to systematically improve them.
By the end of the 2021 business year, BASF had evaluated 98.7% of the relevant portfolio (2020: 98.4%).
This refers to the BASF Group’s sales from products in its strategic portfolio to third parties in the business
year concerned. By the end of 2021, sustainability analyses and assessments had been conducted for
more than 56,000 specific product applications (2020: >57,000), accounting for €71 billion in sales (2020:
€54.1 billion).

BASF Group's segments per year-end 2021
Chemicals
Segment overview
The Chemicals segment consists of the Petrochemicals and Intermediates divisions. It supplies the other
segments with basic chemicals and intermediates, contributing to the organic growth of BASF's key value
chains. Alongside internal transfers, BASF's customers mainly come from the chemical and plastics
industries. BASF aims to expand its competitiveness through technological leadership and operational
excellence.
Segment strategy
The Chemicals segment is at the heart of the Verbund. It reliably supplies BASF’s other segments with
chemicals to produce higher value-added products. It also markets high-quality basic chemicals and
intermediates to customers in downstream industries. In this way, the Chemicals segment makes a
significant contribution to BASF’s organic growth.
BASF creates value through process and product innovation and invests in research and development to
implement new, sustainable technologies and makes its existing technologies even more efficient.
Technological leadership, operational excellence and a clear focus on individual value chains are among
its most important competitive advantages. BASF concentrates on the critical success factors of the
traditional chemicals business: leveraging economies of scale and the advantages of its Verbund, high
asset reliability, continuous optimization of access to raw materials, lean and energy efficient processes,
and reliable, cost-effective logistics. BASF continuously improves its value chains and is expanding its
market position – especially in Asia – with investments and collaborations in growth markets.
Furthermore, BASF is constantly improving its global production structures and aligning these with
regional market requirements. For example, BASF closed a production plant for butanediol in Kuantan,
Malaysia, in 2021. BASF also plans to expand its 2-ethylhexanoic acid plant there, which is scheduled for
startup in 2024.
Business review full-year 2021
At €13,579 million, sales to third parties in the Chemicals segment were €5,508 million above the prior-
year figure in 2021. Both divisions contributed to the increase with considerable sales growth. The
Petrochemicals division increased sales by €4,248 million to €9,674 million, while sales in the
Intermediates division rose by €1,259 million to €3,904 million.
Sales performance was mainly driven by significantly higher price levels. This was largely due to strong
demand alongside low product availability, mainly caused by extreme weather conditions such as Winter
Storm Uri in North America, supply chain disruptions, as well as significantly higher feedstock and energy
costs. As a result, the Petrochemicals division increased prices in all business areas, especially for steam
cracker products, styrene monomers and along the entire propylene value chain. The Intermediates
division raised prices in the butanediol and derivatives business in particular, as well as in the acids and
polyalcohols business.
Sales growth was supported by a significant increase in volumes due to strong demand. Volumes in the
Petrochemicals division grew mainly in steam cracker products and styrene monomers. The Intermediates
division increased volumes primarily in the butanediol and derivatives business and in the acids and
polyalcohols business. The amines business in Europe also posted significant volume growth. In the
                                                     43


previous year, volume development was significantly weighed down by the impact of the coronavirus
pandemic and the unplanned outage of the steam cracker in Port Arthur, Texas.
Sales growth was curbed by negative currency effects, mainly relating to the U.S. dollar.
Sales development was slightly dampened by portfolio effects in the Petrochemicals division from the
disposal of BASF’s share in the condensate splitter in Port Arthur, Texas, to Total Petrochemicals &
Refining USA, Inc.
Compared with 2020, income from operations (EBIT) before special items rose by €2,529 million to €2,974
million as a result of considerable earnings growth in both divisions. In both the Petrochemicals and
Intermediates divisions, this was primarily attributable to significantly higher margins, higher sales volumes
and improved income from investments accounted for using the equity method.
EBIT amounted to €2,997 million, an improvement of €3,189 million compared with the previous year. This
included special income from the disposal of BASF’s share in the condensate splitter in the first quarter of
2021. In the previous year, special items were mainly impacted by impairments.
Materials
Segment overview
The Materials segment is composed of the Performance Materials division and the Monomers division.
The Materials segment's portfolio comprises advanced materials and their precursors for new applications
and systems. These include isocyanates and polyamides as well as inorganic basic products and
specialties for the plastics and plastics processing industries. BASF wants to focus primarily on organic
growth through differentiation via specific technological expertise, industry know-how and customer
proximity to maximize value in the isocyanate and polyamide value chains.
Strategy
The Materials segment develops new plastics applications, high-performance materials, systems and
digital solutions. BASF’s product portfolio is unique in the industry. BASF aims to grow mainly organically
by differentiating itself from its competitors with its systems-oriented application expertise and industry
knowledge and creating maximum value in its isocyanate and polyamide value chains. BASF’s advanced
material simulation capabilities are a unique selling proposition in the industry and enable BASF to operate
close to its customers.
Additional differentiators are BASF’s products that contribute to the circular economy and its more
sustainable production processes. BASF is active in substantial parts of plastic value chains, from
monomers to polymers and their formulated specialties. Combined with its specific technology knowledge,
this offers BASF the unique ability to shape and close cycles itself. One concrete example is BASF’s pilot
projects for recycling used mattresses: Based on a wet chemical process developed by BASF, precursors
recovered from old mattresses can be used to produce new mattress-sized blocks of flexible polyurethane
foam. Other examples include BASF’s ChemCycling™ project, biomass balanced products and certified
compostable bioplastics. This also enables BASF to meet growing customer needs in all key markets.
Tailor-made service and product offerings enable BASF to continuously expand the range of applications
in its portfolio. BASF operates close to its customers with its global production network.
Business review full-year 2021
The Materials segment increased sales to third parties by €4,478 million year on year to €15,214 million in
2021. This was due to considerable sales growth in both divisions. The Monomers division increased sales
by €2,821 million to €7,922 million. At €7,292 million, sales in the Performance Materials division were
€1,657 million above the prior-year figure.
Sales growth was due mainly to significantly higher prices resulting from strong demand alongside low
product availability and increased prices for raw materials. Production and supply chain disruptions
associated with extreme weather conditions and raw material shortages negatively impacted product
market availability. The Monomers division achieved higher prices primarily in isocyanates and
polyamides, while the Performance Materials division raised price levels mainly in polyurethane systems
and engineering plastics.
Volumes rose significantly as a result of strong demand and contributed to sales growth. The Performance
Materials division recorded higher sales volumes in the transportation and consumer goods industries,
especially in Asia Pacific and Europe. In the second half of 2021, volume development was, however,
negatively impacted by the semiconductor shortage in the automotive market and the resulting production
outages. Overall, sales volumes in the construction industry were slightly above the prior-year level.
Higher volumes in Europe more than compensated for lower volumes in North America. The Monomers
                                                       44


division increased volumes, especially of polyamide 6.6 following the slight recovery in automotive
production in 2021 after the weak prior year due to the pandemic. Sales volumes of methylene diphenyl
diisocyanate (MDI) were also higher.
Portfolio effects from the acquisition of the integrated polyamide business from Solvay, which closed as of
January 31, 2020, had a slightly positive impact on sales.
Currency effects, primarily relating to the U.S. dollar, had a slightly negative impact on sales development
in both divisions.
Income from operations (EBIT) before special items rose by €1,583 million compared with 2020 to €2,418
million. Both divisions considerably increased EBIT before special items. Earnings growth in the
Monomers division was primarily due to higher margins in isocyanates and polyamides. In the
Performance Materials division, EBIT before special items was above the prior-year level, mainly driven by
positive volume development.
EBIT rose by €2,454 million year on year to €2,345 million. Special items amounted to –€73 million in
2021, after –€944 million in 2020. The special charges in the previous year were primarily attributable to
impairments.
Industrial Solutions
Segment overview
The Industrial Solutions segment consists of the Dispersions & Resins and the Performance Chemicals
divisions. The segment develops and markets ingredients and additives for industrial applications, such as
fuel and lubricant solutions, polymer dispersions, resins, electronic materials, antioxidants, light stabilizers,
oilfield chemicals, and mineral processing and hydrometallurgical chemicals. BASF aims to drive organic
growth in key industries such as automotive, plastics, electronics, and energy and resources, and expand
its position in value-enhancing additives and solutions by leveraging its comprehensive industry expertise
and application know-how.
Strategy
The Industrial Solutions segment markets and develops ingredients and additives for industrial
applications. These include fuel and lubricant solutions, ingredients for paints and coatings, electronic
materials and plastic additives. BASF concentrates on research and development and invests in the
creation of innovations with the aim of enabling more efficient resource use. This is why BASF develops
more sustainable products and processes, for example, in polymer dispersions, resins and plastic
additives, and enable its customers to contribute to sustainability through their applications and processes.
Other focus areas are efficient production setups, backward integration in BASF’s Production Verbund’s
value chains, capacity management, and technology and cost leadership.
BASF’s global presence enables it to operate close to its customers and their industries. As a reliable
partner, BASF offers high-quality products at good value. BASF works on new solutions together with its
customers and strives for long-term partnerships that create profitable growth opportunities for both
parties. To achieve this, BASF draws on its innovative strength and its many years of experience and in-
depth industry expertise. Through its in-depth application knowledge and technological innovations, BASF
strengthens customer relationships in key industries such as the automotive, plastics and electronics
industries.
Business review full-year 2021
Sales to third parties in the Industrial Solutions segment rose by €1,232 million year on year to €8,876
million in 2021. This was attributable to considerably higher sales in both divisions. The Dispersions &
Resins division increased sales by €812 million to €5,681 million. Sales in the Performance Chemicals
division amounted to €3,195 million, €420 million above the prior-year figure.
The positive sales performance was attributable to higher volumes and prices in both divisions. The
increase in sales volumes mainly resulted from the global economic recovery from the coronavirus
pandemic. Volume growth in the Dispersions & Resins division was mainly driven by the dispersions
business. The Performance Chemicals division recorded higher sales volumes in all business areas.
The higher price level was driven primarily by increased raw materials prices. Both divisions raised prices
in almost all business areas and all regions.
Portfolio effects in the Dispersions & Resins division following the disposal of the global pigments business
as of June 30, 2021, had an offsetting impact.
Sales were also reduced by slightly negative currency effects in both divisions, mainly relating to the U.S.
dollar.
                                                      45


Income from operations (EBIT) before special items amounted to €1,006 million, an increase of €184
million compared with the previous year. This was attributable to considerably higher EBIT before special
items in the Dispersions & Resins division, mainly as a result of volume growth.
By contrast, EBIT before special items declined slightly in the Performance Chemicals division. This was
primarily due to the increase in fixed costs mainly from higher bonus provisions, lower margins due to
higher raw materials prices, and negative currency effects. This could not be offset by the division’s
positive volume performance.
At €965 million, EBIT was €335 million above the prior-year figure. Special items amounted to –€42 million
in 2021 after –€192 million in 2020. Special charges in the previous year related mainly to the carve-out of
the pigments business and impairments.
Surface Technologies
Segment overview
The Surface Technologies segment comprises the Catalysts and Coatings divisions, which offer chemical
solutions for surfaces. Its portfolio serves industries such as the automotive and chemical sectors and
includes automotive OEM and refinish coatings, surface treatment, catalysts, battery materials, and
precious and base metal services. BASF improves its customers' applications and processes with tailored
products, technologies and solutions, and support them through geographical proximity across all regions.
The aim is to drive BASF's growth by leveraging its portfolio of technologies and expanding BASF's
position as a leading and innovative provider of battery materials and surface coatings solutions.
Strategy
In the Surface Technologies segment, BASF’s focus is on the protection, modification and development of
surfaces. BASF develops innovative products and technologies in close collaboration with its customers
from the catalysts, coatings, battery materials and surface treatments sectors. BASF's aim is to drive
organic growth by leveraging its portfolio of technologies to find the best solution for its customers in terms
of functionality and cost. This helps its customers to drive forward innovation in their industries and
contribute to sustainable development.
Key growth drivers for BASF are the positive medium-term development of the automotive market,
especially in Asia, the trend toward sustainable, low-emission mobility in the automotive industry, and the
associated rise in demand for battery materials for electromobility. Together with its customers, BASF is
developing customized, sustainable solutions in these growth areas for battery materials, emission control,
lightweight engineering concepts and coatings. Its specialties and system solutions enable customers to
stand out from their competition.
The above trends mean that the automotive industry is currently undergoing a fundamental transformation.
As one of the largest chemicals suppliers to this industry, BASF will, as announced in December 2021,
further strengthen its focus on battery materials and recycling and pursue an ambitious growth plan. BASF
will also establish a new entity (BASF Automotive Catalysts and Recycling) within the Catalysts division for
mobile emissions catalysts, automotive catalysts recycling and associated precious metal services. The
carve-out process started in January 2022. The new organizational structure will prepare the business for
the upcoming changes in the internal combustion engine market and allow for future strategic options.
Business review full-year 2021
Sales to third parties in the Surface Technologies segment rose by €6,000 million compared with the
previous year to €22,659 million. Both divisions contributed to the increase. The Catalysts division
recorded sales growth of €5,649 million to €19,219 million. The Coatings division increased sales by €351
million year on year to €3,440 million.
Sales growth was driven by the strong increase in precious metal prices in the Catalysts division. This also
led to considerably higher sales in precious metal trading, at €10,376 million (2020: €7,612 million). The
Coatings division recorded slightly higher prices in all business areas.
Considerably higher sales volumes on the back of the global economic recovery from the coronavirus
pandemic and following stronger demand also contributed to the positive sales development. Both
divisions increased volumes in all business areas. Volume development in the segment was dampened by
the ongoing shortage of semiconductors in the automotive market and production and supply chain
disruptions.
Portfolio effects in the Catalysts division following the acquisition of BASF’s majority shareholding in BASF
Shanshan Battery Materials Co., Ltd. had a slightly positive impact on sales.
Sales performance was weighed down by negative currency effects, mainly relating to the U.S. dollar.
                                                       46


At €800 million, income from operations (EBIT) before special items was €316 million above the 2020
figure due to considerably higher earnings in the Catalysts division. This was driven by growth in sales
volumes and the considerably higher earnings contribution from precious metal trading.
EBIT before special items in the Coatings division declined considerably compared with the previous year.
The significant rise in volumes was unable to compensate for higher fixed costs, primarily from higher
bonus provisions, and a weaker margin due to increased raw materials prices.
EBIT rose by €1,348 million to €761 million. In 2021, BASF recorded special items of –€39 million after –
€1,071 million in 2020, mainly in connection with special charges for impairments.
Nutrition & Care
Segment overview
In the Nutrition & Care segment – consisting of the Care Chemicals and Nutrition & Health divisions –
BASF serves the growing and increasingly sophisticated demands for fast-moving consumer goods.
BASF's customers include food and feed producers as well as the pharmaceutical, cosmetics, detergent
and cleaner industries. The company strives to expand its position as a leading provider of ingredients and
solutions for consumer applications in the areas of nutrition, home and personal care. BASF's goal is to
drive organic growth by focusing on emerging markets, new business models and sustainability trends in
consumer markets, supported by targeted acquisitions.
Strategy
In the Nutrition & Care segment, BASF strives to expand its position as a leading provider of nutrition and
care ingredients for consumer applications. BASF aims to enhance its technology capabilities in fields
such as biotechnology and broaden its product portfolio with biobased and biodegradable innovations. In
this connection, BASF has entered into partnerships to further strengthen its position in the bio-based
surfactants and actives market. One example is the technology cooperation with Holiferm Ltd, Manchester,
United Kingdom. The focus here is on the development of fermentatively accessible glycolipids for home
and personal care and industrial formulator applications.
BASF’s enzymes business enables it to pursue a targeted, accelerated marketing strategy and expand
BASF’s portfolio for natural and biotechnological products. Furthermore, BASF is investing in natural and
biological substances. BASF’s biopharma business supports the biopharmaceutical industry by supplying
the raw materials used to produce biological drugs.
In addition, acquisitions complement BASF’s focus on emerging markets, new business models and
sustainability trends in consumer markets. Future growth in BASF’s markets will be driven by trends like
growing consumer awareness and the resulting demand for sustainable product solutions, natural and
organic ingredients and their traceability. Moreover, the shift toward individualization and local production
supports new players and business models. Digitalization, a focused technology and product portfolio, and
close cooperation with BASF’s customers is crucial to meeting these dynamic market requirements both
now and in the future.
Business review full-year 2021
Sales to third parties in the Nutrition & Care segment rose by €423 million year on year to €6,442 million in
2021. This was attributable to the Care Chemicals division, which recorded sales growth of €450 million to
€4,439 million. By contrast, in the Nutrition & Health division, sales declined by €27 million compared with
2020 to €2,003 million.
The sales increase at segment level was primarily due to higher volumes. The Care Chemicals division
increased its volumes mainly in the home care, industrial and institutional cleaning and industrial
formulators business and in the personal care solutions business. Volumes rose slightly in the Nutrition &
Health division, especially in the pharmaceutical and aroma ingredients businesses. This more than
compensated for reduced volumes due to the lower availability of vitamin A.
Sales were positively impacted by higher prices overall due to significantly higher price levels in the Care
Chemicals division, especially in the oleo surfactants and fatty alcohols business as well as in the home
care, industrial and institutional cleaning and industrial formulators business, mainly as a result of higher
raw materials prices. This more than compensated for slightly lower prices in the Nutrition & Health
division.
Slightly negative currency effects, mainly relating to the U.S. dollar, had an offsetting effect.
Portfolio effects from the sale of the production site in Kankakee, Illinois, had a negative impact on sales in
both divisions.
                                                     47


Compared with the prior-year figure, income from operations (EBIT) before special items declined by €276
million to €497 million due to lower earnings contributions from both divisions. The decline in earnings in
the Nutrition & Health division resulted from lower margins, driven by higher prices for raw materials and
energy, the lower availability of vitamin A, and higher fixed costs, primarily from higher bonus provisions.
EBIT before special items in the Care Chemicals division decreased due mainly to higher fixed costs,
largely as a result of higher bonus provisions.
EBIT declined by €134 million year on year to €554 million. It included special income from the sale of the
production site in Kankakee, Illinois, in the second quarter of 2021. In the previous year, EBIT included
special charges, mainly for impairments and provisions, primarily for the optimization of production
structures in the Nutrition & Health division.
Agricultural Solutions
Segment overview
In the Agricultural Solutions segment, BASF aims to further strengthen its market position as an integrated
provider of crop protection products, seeds and digital solutions. The portfolio comprises fungicides,
herbicides, insecticides and biological crop protection products, as well as seeds and seed treatment
products. BASF's strategy is based on innovation-driven organic growth, targeted portfolio expansion and
leveraging synergies from acquisitions. Customer needs, societal expectations and reducing
environmental impacts are the company's innovation drivers for the segment.
Strategy
Farming is fundamental given that by 2050, the world’s population is expected to increase by two billion
people. In the Agricultural Solutions segment, BASF believes that the way forward for agriculture is to find
the right balance and create value for the environment, society and business. While the demand for food,
feed, fiber and energy is growing, natural resources are limited. Agriculture is a key enabler in providing
enough healthy, affordable food and responding to changing consumer behavior while reducing the impact
on the environment.
As one of the world’s leading agricultural solutions companies, BASF is committed to making a positive
impact on sustainable agriculture and food systems. BASF’s innovation-driven strategy for agriculture
focuses on selected crops and their appropriate cultivation systems in specific regions. BASF integrates
sustainability criteria into all business and portfolio decisions. In doing so, BASF helps farmers achieve
better yield – yield that is produced in ways that are recognized as valuable by society, are kind to the
planet and enable farmers to produce economically.
BASF leverages its expertise in research and development and its deep understanding of the way
individual growers manage their farms to provide offers across technologies. These include novel solutions
for seeds, traits, crop protection and digital products, which BASF links intelligently. This enables BASF to
offer farmers solutions tailored to their region and crop systems to safeguard yields, mitigate risks and
fulfill societal requirements.
Investments
The investment in a formulation hub for crop protection products in Singapore will, from 2022 onward,
ensure that multiple formulation technologies are produced in close proximity to farmers in Asia Pacific.
BASF also invested in the expansion of its production site in Sparks, Georgia, establishing a new
formulation plant for seed treatment products, which came into operation in 2021. At the Nunhem site in
the Netherlands, BASF continued the expansion of its breeding facilities for vegetable seeds with a state-
of-the-art tomato greenhouse, which has been available since 2021. Further investments were made in the
modernization of site infrastructure in North America. To meet continuing high demand for innovative
solutions in the future, between 2022 and 2026, BASF will invest more than €950 million in developing and
expanding its infrastructure, including state-of-the-art R&D facilities, and in its production and formulation
capacities for active ingredients as well as for seed solutions.
Research & Development
BASF’s research and development activities innovate for farmers’ success in strategically relevant crops in
major markets around the world. They range from seed, biological and chemistry innovations to digital
solutions that protect plants against fungal diseases, insect pests and weeds, and improve soil
management and plant health. In 2021, BASF spent €904 million on research and development in the
Agricultural Solutions segment, representing around 11% of the segment’s sales. By 2031, BASF will
launch major pipeline projects across all business areas. BASF’s well-stocked innovation pipeline has a
peak sales potential totaling more than €7.5 billion with products to be launched between 2021 and 2031.
BASF’s solutions help farmers achieve better yield and promote healthy eating, balancing economic,
environment and societal demands.
                                                              48


BASF’s research and development facilities are a global network of research sites, seed production and
breeding stations. Proximity to its customers and the crops they grow enables BASF to seize future market
opportunities and increase BASF’s competitiveness.
BASF’s biotechnology activities and its research and development capabilities comprise advanced
breeding techniques, analytics, technology platforms and trait validation. To offer tailor-made, more
sustainable crop solutions, BASF’s research platform on gene identification focuses on plant
characteristics that enable higher yield and better quality, disease resistance and tolerance of
environmental factors, such as drought. BASF applies state-of-the-art scientific methods such as genetic
engineering and selective genome editing. These biotechnology activities are part of BASF’s Bioscience
Research division.1
Sustainability
In 2020, BASF launched its Agricultural Solutions sustainability commitments. The commitments focus on
four areas to help farmers to find the right balance: climate-smart farming, sustainable solutions, digital
farming and smart stewardship.
Climate-smart farming: Helping farmers tackle pressing climate challenges with the right combination of
technologies designed to increase yield, make farm management easier and more effective, and reduce
the impact on the environment. BASF technologies include nitrogen management products to improve
fertilizer efficiency and lower greenhouse gas emissions, no-till herbicides, seeds and traits for more
stress-resilient crops, natural biological inoculants as well as digital solutions.
Sustainable solutions: BASF systematically steer its innovation pipeline according to sustainability criteria
from an early stage. This enables BASF to continually develop innovations that offer added value for
farmers, the environment and society. BASF also assess each product in its existing portfolio with respect
to its contribution to sustainability. In this way, BASF systematically steer its portfolio to every year
increase the share of sales from solutions that make a substantial sustainability contribution.
Digital farming: Digitalization has the power to transform agriculture and make it more efficient, inclusive
and sustainable. BASF digital solutions help farmers to produce more with less by growing their business
profitably while reducing their environmental footprint.
Smart stewardship: BASF stewardship tools and services are tailored to farmers' daily work. Farmers get
the support they need to use BASF's products safely: access to tools and services, protective equipment,
customized training, digital solutions and new and future-oriented application technologies such as drones.
Business review full-year 2021
At €8,162 million, sales to third parties in the Agricultural Solutions segment were €502 million above the
prior-year level in 2021. The main drivers were higher volumes in all regions and higher prices. Negative
currency effects had an offsetting impact.
In Europe, sales rose by €93 million year on year to €2,128 million. This was primarily attributable to
higher volumes, especially in fungicides and herbicides. Slightly higher prices contributed to sales
performance. Sales were reduced by negative currency effects, mainly in eastern Europe and Turkey.
Sales in North America rose by €81 million to €3,085 million. Higher sales volumes, especially for
herbicides, more than compensated for negative currency effects and slightly lower prices.
In Asia, BASF increased sales by €114 million to €958 million. This was mainly due to higher sales
volumes, especially in fungicides and insecticides, primarily in China. Slightly higher price levels
contributed to the positive sales development, while negative currency effects had a dampening impact.
Sales in the region South America, Africa, Middle East amounted to €1,990 million, €213 million above the
previous year, and were driven by significantly higher price levels and considerable volume growth in all
sectors, especially in Brazil. This more than offset negative currency effects, especially in Argentina and
Brazil.
At €715 million, income from operations (EBIT) before special items was €255 million below the 2020
figure. This was primarily attributable to significantly higher fixed costs, mainly from much higher bonus
provisions, significantly higher raw materials prices and logistics costs, and a low-margin product mix.
Earnings were also weighed down by negative currency effects.
EBIT amounted to €696 million, €114 million higher than in the previous year. This figure included special
income from the sale of non-capitalized know-how. Special charges in connection with streamlining the


1
    Corporate research and development expenses, sales, earnings and all other data for BASF’s Bioscience Research division
    are not reported in the Agricultural Solutions segment; they continue to be reported under “Other”.
                                                     49


global glufosinate-ammonium production network had an offsetting effect but were well below the special
charges incurred in the previous year.


Non-integral Oil and Gas Business
Following the approval of all relevant authorities, BASF and LetterOne successfully completed the merger
of Wintershall and DEA on May 1, 2019. BASF initially held 67% and LetterOne 33% of Wintershall Dea’s
ordinary shares, reflecting the value of the respective exploration and production businesses of Winterhall
and DEA. To reflect the value of Wintershall’s gas transportation business, BASF received additional
preference shares. On May 1, 2022, these preference shares were converted into ordinary shares of
Wintershall Dea, resulting in BASF having a total shareholding in Wintershall Dea of 72.7%.
Since May 1, 2019, BASF's participating interest in Wintershall Dea is reported in the consolidated
financial statements of the BASF Group according to the equity method.

BASF's Group Segments as per half-year 2022

Chemicals
Half-year 2022
Sales in the Chemicals segment rose considerably compared with the second quarter of 2021. Both
operating divisions contributed to the increase. Sales growth was primarily driven by significantly higher
prices in both divisions, mainly due to the passing on of increased prices for raw materials and energy
amid continued strong demand. The Petrochemicals division raised prices in all business areas, especially
for steam cracker products, styrene monomers and in the propylene and butadiene value chains. The
Intermediates division achieved higher price levels across all business areas.
Sales performance was supported by positive currency effects, mainly relating to the U.S. dollar.
Overall, sales volumes were slightly lower than in the prior-year quarter. This was primarily attributable to
coronavirus lockdowns in China and the resulting supply chain disruptions. Consequently, the
Intermediates division recorded considerably lower sales volumes in the butanediol and derivatives
business in particular. The slight decline in volumes in the Petrochemicals division mainly related to steam
cracker products, styrene monomers and acrylics.
Income from operations (EBIT) before special items remained at a high level but was considerably below
the exceptionally strong earnings in the prior-year quarter. This was primarily due to considerably lower
earnings in the Petrochemicals division, mainly from higher fixed costs as a result of the increase in
energy prices and currency effects. Lower income from investments accounted for using the equity
method also contributed to the decrease. By contrast, the earnings development in the division was
positively impacted by continued strong margins. EBIT before special items declined slightly in the
Intermediates division. Higher margins in North America on the back of continued strong demand were not
able to fully compensate for lower margins and volumes in the Asia Pacific region resulting from the
lockdowns, and for higher fixed costs from turnarounds, especially in Ludwigshafen, Germany.

Materials

Half-year 2022
The Materials segment increased sales considerably compared with the prior-year quarter. This was
primarily the result of strong sales growth in the Monomers division. The Performance Materials division
also recorded a considerable increase.
The positive sales performance was mainly due to significantly higher prices from passing on the increase
in raw materials prices. The Monomers division raised prices in all business areas. The Performance
Materials division raised prices for polyurethane systems and engineering plastics in particular.
Sales growth was supported by currency effects, mainly from the U.S. dollar and the Chinese renminbi.
Lower volumes in the Performance Materials division, largely resulting from the lockdowns in China and
the ensuing supply chain disruptions, had a slight offsetting effect. In the Monomers division, higher
polyamide volumes in North America only partially compensated for lower sales volumes overall in Europe.
Income from operations (EBIT) before special items decreased considerably compared with the second
quarter of 2021. In both divisions, higher margins were unable to offset the increase in fixed costs. The
Monomers division recorded higher fixed costs, mainly as a result of the increase in energy prices and
currency effects. Fixed costs in the Performance Materials division were above the prior-year quarter,
                                                     50


primarily due to higher production costs amid lower plant capacity utilization.

Industrial Solutions

Half-year 2022
Sales in the Industrial Solutions segment rose considerably compared with the second quarter of 2021.
This was mainly driven by strong sales growth in the Performance Chemicals division. The Dispersions &
Resins division recorded a slight sales increase.
The sales increase was primarily due to significantly higher price levels across all business areas and in all
regions. This was largely the result of higher prices for raw materials, energy and freight.
Sales growth was supported by positive currency effects, mainly relating to the U.S. dollar and the
Chinese renminbi.
Sales were considerably reduced by portfolio effects, especially in the Dispersions & Resins division
following the disposal of the global pigments business as of June 30, 2021.
In addition, slightly lower sales volumes dampened sales development in both divisions. This was mainly
due to the lockdowns in China and disruptions to global supply chains.
The segment’s income from operations (EBIT) before special items was slightly above the prior-year
quarter. This reflected the significant rise in earnings in the Performance Chemicals division, primarily from
price-driven margin growth. Fixed costs were much higher, mainly as a result of currency effects and
scheduled turnarounds, and dampened earnings development in the division. By contrast, EBIT before
special items declined slightly in the Dispersions & Resins division. The decrease in earnings was
primarily due to the sale of the global pigments business. This could only be partially offset by margin
growth on the back of higher prices.

Surface Technologies

Half-year 2022
In the Surface Technologies segment, sales were considerably below the prior-year quarter. Considerable
sales growth in the Coatings division was unable to offset the strong decline in the Catalysts division.
The year-on-year sales decrease was primarily due to significantly lower volumes in the Catalysts division.
This was mainly the result of weaker demand from the automotive industry due to insufficient
semiconductor supply and the lockdowns in China. Volumes declined significantly in the mobile emissions
catalysts business and in precious metal trading. Higher sales volumes in all of the division’s other
business areas were unable to compensate for this. Sales volumes rose slightly in the Coatings division.
Volume growth in the automotive refinish coatings and automotive OEM coatings businesses more than
compensated for lower volumes in the surface treatment business.
The Catalysts division’s sales were also reduced by significantly lower precious metal prices. Accordingly,
at €3,269 million, sales in precious metal trading and precious metal sales in the mobile emissions
catalysts business were well below the prior-year quarter (€4,284 million). By contrast, the Coatings
division raised prices significantly in all business areas.
Currency effects, mainly relating to the U.S. dollar, cushioned the sales decrease.
Portfolio effects in the Catalysts division following the acquisition of a majority shareholding in BASF
Shanshan Battery Materials also had a positive impact on sales.
Income from operations (EBIT) before special items declined considerably compared with the second
quarter of 2021. This was attributable to the considerable decline in the Coatings division’s EBIT before
special items, mainly due to higher fixed costs. One reason for this was a one-off effect that had reduced
fixed costs in the prior-year quarter. The Catalysts division posted a slight increase in EBIT before special
items thanks to a clearly positive contribution from the battery materials business. The division’s earnings
were weighed down by significantly lower volumes in the mobile emissions catalysts business and lower
prices in precious metal trading.
                                                          51


Nutrition & Care

Half-year 2022
Sales in the Nutrition & Care segment rose considerably compared with the second quarter of 2021. Both
divisions contributed significantly. Sales growth was driven by significantly higher prices across all
business areas, passing on increased prices for raw materials and energy.
Currency effects, mainly relating to the U.S. dollar and the Chinese renminbi, had a positive impact on
sales.
Sales development was also supported by slightly higher volumes. This was primarily due to volume
growth in the Nutrition & Health division, mainly in the pharma solutions and animal nutrition businesses.
The Care Chemicals division recorded slightly lower sales volumes, particularly in the oleo surfactants and
fatty alcohols business, as well as in the home care, industrial and institutional cleaning and industrial
formulators business.
Portfolio effects from the sale of the production site in Kankakee, Illinois, reduced sales in both divisions.
The segment’s income from operations (EBIT) before special items was considerably above the prior-year
quarter. This was due to the considerable increase in EBIT before special items in the Care Chemicals
division, primarily from higher margins on the back of sales growth. EBIT before special items declined in
the Nutrition & Health division. Higher margins were unable to offset the increase in fixed costs resulting
from scheduled turnarounds, among other factors.

Agricultural Solutions

Half-year 2022
Sales in the Agricultural Solutions segment rose considerably compared with the second quarter of 2021.
This was mainly attributable to higher prices in all regions and positive currency effects, mainly from the
U.S. dollar. Significantly higher volumes also contributed to the sales development.
The slight sales decrease in Europe was driven by significantly lower volumes, primarily due to earlier
demand in the first quarter of 2022 and slightly negative currency effects, mainly from the Turkish lira.
Prices, on the other hand, were raised significantly.
In North America, sales were considerably above the prior-year quarter as a result of positive currency
effects, higher price levels and volume growth, especially for herbicides and field crop seeds.
The strong sales growth in Asia was primarily driven by positive currency effects and higher prices.
Especially in China, BASF recorded higher volumes in all indications.
Sales rose significantly in the region South America, Africa, Middle East. This was the result of significantly
higher price levels and positive currency effects, especially in Brazil. Significantly higher volumes in almost
all indications supported the sales increase.
Income from operations (EBIT) before special items was considerably above the prior-year quarter. This
was mainly attributable to the positive sales development, which more than compensated for higher costs.


                       RESPONSIBLE CONDUCT ALONG THE VALUE CHAIN
Supplier Management
BASF's partnerships with suppliers are based on mutual value creation, as well as a reliable supply of raw
materials, technical goods and services at competitive prices.1 In doing so, BASF wants to generate long-
term benefits for both sides. BASF’s sustainability-oriented supply chain management is an integral part of
its risk management. BASF has defined its standards and processes in a global guideline. BASF is
continually refining and optimizing this to respond to changes in the regulatory environment and new
requirements resulting, for example, from new laws and initiatives at national and international level.
Procurement management systems such as guidelines and targets are set centrally and are binding for all
employees with procurement responsibility worldwide.



1
    BASF considers all direct suppliers of the BASF Group in the business year 2021 concerned as Tier 1 suppliers. These
    are suppliers that provide BASF with raw materials, investment goods, consumables and services. Suppliers can be
    natural persons, companies or legal persons under public law.
                                                      52


BASF’s risk-based approach aims to identify and evaluate sustainability matters in its value chains as best
possible to improve sustainability together with its suppliers. BASF regularly reviews and documents
progress based on the risk level. Employees with procurement responsibility receive ongoing training in
sustainability-oriented supplier management and responsible procurement. In 2021, 250 BASF employees
received such training.
BASF’s expectations of its suppliers are laid down in the global Supplier Code of Conduct. This creates
clarity around the standards to be met. BASF counts on reliable supplier relationships and supports its
suppliers in implementing its requirements. In 2021, BASF also launched the Supplier CO2 Management
Program. With this program, BASF wants to systematically gather data on upstream Scope 3 emissions to
identify medium-term measures for optimization. BASF makes its suppliers’ contribution to sustainable
development transparent for it and for its stakeholders.
Raw materials
In 2021, BASF purchased a total of around 35,000 different raw materials from more than 6,500 suppliers.
Using resources as efficiently and responsibly as possible and the concept of the circular economy are
firmly embedded in BASF’s strategy and its actions, for example, by BASF’s Verbund structure and the
increased use of renewable and recycled feedstocks. BASF expects its suppliers to source and produce
raw materials responsibly.
BASF’s strategy covers the entire value chain – from responsible procurement and the efficient use and
recycling of raw materials in BASF’s processes to developing resource-saving solutions for its customers.
BASF wants to decouple growth from resource consumption with process and product innovations to
accelerate the shift toward closed-loop value creation systems. Alongside economic, environmental and
social criteria, BASF also considers aspects such as product safety and supply security when selecting
suppliers and raw materials.
BASF takes a closer look at suppliers in critical supply chains, for example mineral raw materials,
renewable resources such as palm kernel oil, a number of pigments and highly toxic substances.
Upstream stages of the value chain are assessed for serious sustainability risks and, if necessary, suitable
remedial measures are identified. In addition, BASF develops and tests approaches to make the supply of
raw materials more sustainable in joint initiatives with suppliers and other partners. Examples include
BASF’s cooperative ventures and investments to recycle batteries and its joint activities on certified
sustainable supply chains for renewable raw materials such as palm, palm kernel and castor oil.
BASF’s Verbund concept is key to making the use of raw materials in BASF’s own processes as efficient
as possible: Intelligently linking and steering BASF’s plants and processes creates efficient value chains.
By-products from one facility are used as feedstocks elsewhere. This saves raw materials and energy. At
the same time, the Verbund offers many opportunities to use renewable and recycled raw materials. BASF
wants to better leverage this potential going forward. For example, BASF is driving forward chemical
recycling of mixed plastic waste and used tires in its ChemCycling™ project.
Resource efficiency and stewardship are also becoming increasingly important topics for BASF’s
customers. That is why BASF is constantly working to reduce the resources consumed in the
manufacturing of its products, for example through more efficient processes, innovative technologies and
the use of renewable and recycled raw materials. This enables BASF to offer its customers solutions that
make a greater contribution to sustainability, like a smaller carbon footprint and better biodegradability.
BASF’s products also improve its customers’ resource efficiency and sustainability in many areas. For
example, BASF additives increase the service life and mechanical recyclability of plastics, which saves
fossil resources and avoids CO2 emissions.

Environmental Protection, Health and Safety
Responsible Care Management System
BASF's Responsible Care Management System comprises the global directives, standards and
procedures for safety, security, health and environmental protection for the various steps along its value
chain. The Environmental Protection, Health & Safety unit in the Corporate Center defines Group-wide
management and control systems and monitors compliance with internal requirements and legal
regulations, while the sites and legal entities implement these requirements locally. BASF’s global network
ensures that information and insights are shared across the BASF Group on an ongoing basis. BASF’s
policies and requirements are continuously updated. BASF also maintains dialog with government
institutions, associations and international organizations for this reason. BASF set itself ambitious goals for
environmental protection, health and safety and regularly reviews its performance and progress with
audits. BASF assesses the potential risks and weaknesses of all its activities – from research and
production to logistics – and the potential effects of these on the safety and security of its employees, the
environment or its surroundings. BASF uses databases to document accidents, near misses and safety-
                                                              53


related incidents at its sites as well as along its transportation routes to learn from these; appropriate
measures are derived according to specific cause analyses.
Safety in production
The safety of its employees, contractors and neighbors, and protecting the environment is BASF's top
priority. This is why BASF has set itself ambitious goals for occupational and process safety as well as
health protection. BASF stipulates mandatory global standards for safety, security, and environmental and
health protection. BASF’s sites and subsidiaries are responsible for implementing and complying with
internal guidelines and legal requirements. As part of its continuous improvement process, BASF regularly
monitors progress toward its goals. BASF has defined its reporting indicators in accordance with the
reporting standard developed by the International Council of Chemical Associations.
Product safety
BASF is committed to continuously minimizing the negative effects of its products on the environment,
health and safety along the value chain – from development to disposal. This commitment to product
safety is enshrined in its Responsible Care® charter and the initiatives of the International Council of
Chemical Associations (ICCA). BASF also ensures uniformly high standards for product safety worldwide.
In some cases, BASF has committed to voluntary initiatives that go beyond the local legal requirements.
BASF maintains and evaluates environmental, health and safety data for its substances and products in a
global database. This information is updated continuously. The database forms the basis for its safety data
sheets, which BASF makes available to its customers in around 40 languages. Its global emergency
hotline network enables the company to provide information around the clock. In order to help users to
quickly find out about BASF’s products and the risks associated with them, BASF uses the Globally
Harmonized System (GHS) to classify and label its products around the world, provided this is legally
permissible in the country concerned. BASF takes into account any national or regional modifications
within the GHS framework, such as the E.U.’s CLP Regulation.
BASF trains and supports its customers in fulfilling their industry or application-specific product
requirements. In associations and together with other manufacturers, BASF is pushing for the
establishment of voluntary global commitments to prevent the misuse of chemicals.
Transportation safety
BASF wants its products to be safely loaded, transported, handled and stored. This is why BASF depends
on reliable logistics partners, global standards and an effective organization. BASF's goal is to minimize
risks along the entire transportation chain – from loading and transportation to unloading. The
transportation of dangerous goods is subject to mandatory national and international dangerous goods
regulations as well as BASF’s global guidelines. The sites and subsidiaries are responsible for
implementing transportation safety regulations and guidelines. Compliance is regularly monitored by the
Environmental Protection, Health & Safety unit in the Corporate Center using globally standardized
transportation safety reviews. External logistics partners are evaluated based risk either through
assessments or on-site audits. BASF’s global network of experts ensures that information, insights and
best practices are shared on an ongoing basis.
BASF regularly assesses the safety and environmental risks of transporting and storing raw materials and
sales products with high hazard potential using its global guideline. This is based on the guidelines of the
European Chemical Industry Council (CEFIC). BASF also has binding global standards for load safety.
BASF stipulates worldwide requirements for its logistics service providers and assesses them in terms of
safety and quality. BASF's experts use its own evaluation and monitoring tools as well as internationally
approved schemes such as the ship inspection reports issued by the Chemical Distribution Institute (CDI)
and the Oil Companies International Marine Forum (OCIMF).
Energy and climate protection
Climate protection is very important to BASF and is an important part of BASF’s corporate strategy. BASF
significantly raised its climate protection targets in 2021: As a leading chemical company, BASF wants to
reduce total greenhouse gas emissions1 from its production sites and its energy purchases by 25% by
2030 compared with 2018 – despite targeted growth and the construction of a large Verbund site in
southern China. By 2050, BASF aims to achieve net zero emissions from its production sites and its
energy purchases.
BASF has bundled its global activities to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in its carbon management.
BASF only considers external offsetting measures as a temporary stop-gap if its activities do not make the


1
    The goal includes greenhouse gases according to the Greenhouse Gas Protocol, which are converted into CO 2 equivalents.
                                                                54


desired contribution to reducing emissions. By 2025, BASF plans to invest up to €1 billion to achieve its
climate protection targets. Additional investments of up to €3 billion are to follow by 2030.
BASF’s new organizational structure aims to drive forward its climate protection targets and carbon
management activities with even greater focus and speed: The Corporate Strategy & Sustainability unit in
the Corporate Center will continue to develop targets and track global target achievement, while the Net
Zero Accelerator unit, which was launched at the beginning of 2022, will focus on accelerating the
implementation of existing and new cross-company projects to reduce emissions. The emphasis is on low-
carbon production technologies, the circular economy and renewable energies. Both units report directly to
the Chairman of the Board of Executive Directors. This ensures that climate protection-relevant aspects
are integrated into strategic decision-making processes as well as into core business activities. In parallel,
BASF’s operating divisions are working on division-specific projects to reduce emissions, supported by the
global service units.
BASF consistently aligns its actions with its climate protection targets, based on a comprehensive analysis
of BASF’s emissions. Group-wide CO2 emissions are anchored in the BASF Group’s steering and
compensation systems as a most important nonfinancial key performance indicator, giving them even
more weight. Investments and acquisitions are assessed with regard to their impact on BASF’s climate
protection targets.
BASF is gradually integrating its suppliers into the management of greenhouse gas emissions along the
value chain. To this end, BASF launched its Supplier CO2 Management Program in 2021.
BASF offers its customers solutions that help prevent greenhouse gas emissions and improve energy and
resource efficiency. More than 60% of BASF’s annual research and development spending1 goes toward
developing these products, optimizing processes, and toward research projects to make BASF’s
processes more energy and resource-efficient and to prevent greenhouse gas emissions.
BASF continuously analyzes potential risks to its business operations arising in connection with the topics
of energy and climate protection and derive appropriate measures. BASF supports the recommendations
of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD). Since the 2019 reporting year, BASF’s
annual report has included an overview showing the sections and subsections in which TCFD-relevant
information can be found. BASF also participates in the program established by the international nonprofit
organization CDP (Carbon Disclosure Project) for reporting on data relevant to climate protection and have
done so since 2004. BASF achieved a score of A– in CDP’s 2021 climate change questionnaire, again
attaining Leadership status. Companies on the Leadership level are distinguished by factors such as the
completeness and transparency of their reporting. They also pursue comprehensive approaches in
managing the opportunities and risks associated with climate change as well as strategies to achieve
company-wide emission reduction goals.
BASF reports on greenhouse gas emissions in accordance with the Greenhouse Gas Protocol as well as
the sector-specific standard for the chemical industry.
Climate protection is a shared task. This is why BASF supports various national and international
initiatives and is involved in partnerships. For instance, in 2021 BASF worked with Together for
Sustainability (TfS), the World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) and the World
Economic Forum’s Low-Carbon Emitting Technologies Initiative (LCET) to harmonize the methodological
approaches used to calculate Scope 3 emissions. This will help increase the transparency of greenhouse
gas emissions along the supply chain and will provide the basis for a Scope 3 target-setting methodology
for the chemical sector.
Water
The responsible use of water as a resource is a core element of BASF’s Responsible Care Management
System and an important part of BASF’s commitment to the United Nations’ Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs).
BASF’s global standards and requirements for water are defined in Group-wide guidelines. Among other
things, these stipulate that water protection concepts must be implemented at all production sites. The
guidelines also cover aspects such as process and transportation safety in order to prevent production and
transportation-related product spillages into water bodies as far as possible. BASF’s sites and subsidiaries
are responsible for implementing and complying with internal guidelines and legal requirements. The
Environmental Protection, Health & Safety unit in the Corporate Center conducts regular audits to monitor
this. BASF’s global network of experts shares information, insights and best practices around the
responsible use of water on an ongoing basis.

1
    Costs not relevant to the calculation of this share include research expenses in early innovation stages of the phase-gate
    process, patent costs and expenses for supporting services.
                                                               55


Introducing and implementing sustainable water management has been a cornerstone of BASF’s strategy
for many years now. BASF’s focus here is on its Verbund sites and on production sites in water stress
areas1. The aim is to protect water as a resource, to use it as efficiently as possible through recirculation,
and to continuously reduce wastewater and emissions. BASF considers the quantitative, qualitative and
social aspects of water use.
BASF pursues its goal by applying the European Water Stewardship standard, which rests on four
principles: sustainable water abstraction, maintaining good water quality, preserving conservation areas,
and ensuring continuous improvement processes.
BASF advocates the responsible use of water as a resource along the entire value chain. BASF audits
supplier compliance with environmental standards in its regular supplier assessments. Where
improvement is necessary, BASF supports suppliers in developing and implementing appropriate
measures, such as the correct handling of wastewater. In addition, BASF is involved in a wide range of
initiatives to promote sustainability in the supply chain. For example, efficient water use is a core part of
the Pragati project to improve sustainability in castor bean farming, the source of the castor oil BASF uses.
BASF offers its customers solutions that help purify water and use it more efficiently while minimizing
pollution. These include high-performance plastics to produce ultrafiltration membranes, seeds with higher
drought and heat tolerance, or water-saving thin-film processes for metal pretreatment.
BASF works with numerous partners along the value chain and from civil society to protect water as a
resource. For instance, BASF is a member of the Alliance for Water Stewardship, a global multi-
stakeholder organization that promotes the responsible use of water. BASF is co-founder of the Alliance to
End Plastic Waste (AEPW) and is also involved in other global networks such as the World Plastics
Council or Operation Clean Sweep to effectively reduce and prevent plastic waste, especially in water
bodies.
BASF reports transparently and comprehensively on water. For instance, BASF again provided detailed
answers to the 2021 water survey from the nonprofit organization CDP. BASF again achieved leadership
status with an A– rating in the final assessment. CDP evaluates how transparently companies report on
their water management activities and how they reduce risks such as water scarcity. The assessment also
considers the extent to which product developments can also contribute to sustainable water management
at the customers of the evaluated companies.
Air and soil
Regular monitoring of BASF's emissions to air is a part of its environmental management. Aside from
greenhouse gases, BASF also measures emissions of other pollutants into the atmosphere. Its climate
protection activities are based on a comprehensive analysis of its emissions.
Its Raw Material Verbund helps the company prevent or reduce waste. BASF regularly carries out audits
to inspect external waste disposal companies to ensure that waste is properly disposed of. In this way,
BASF also contribute to preventive soil protection and keep today's waste from becoming tomorrow's
contamination. If soil and groundwater contamination occurs at active or former BASF sites, proper
remediation measures are reviewed based on prevailing legal and current technical standards, and
undertaken as necessary.
Employees
BASF's employees are key to the successful implementation of the company's strategy. BASF is
convinced of the value of excellent employees, leaders and working conditions, and strives to give its
employees the tools and skills necessary to be able to offer its customers products and services with an
even greater level of differentiation and customization. This positions BASF to meet the challenges of an
increasingly rapidly changing environment, demographic change and the digital workplace. In everything
BASF does, the company is committed to complying with internationally recognized labor and social
standards.
Customer Focus
With customers as its number one priority, BASF supplies products and services to around 90,000
customers from various sectors in almost every country in the world. BASF's customer portfolio ranges
from major global customers and small and medium-sized enterprises to end consumers. Due to such a
comprehensive product portfolio, BASF is active in many value chains and value creation networks. BASF
uses various business strategies, which are adapted to the needs of individual industries and markets.
These range from cost leadership in basic chemicals to tailored, customer-specific system solutions.

1
    BASF defines water stress areas as regions in which more than 40% of available water is used by industry, households and
    agriculture. BASF’s definition is based on the Water Risk Atlas (Aqueduct 3.0) published by the World Resources Institute.
                                                      56


BASF strives to be its customers' most attractive partner for all challenges that can be solved with
chemistry. This is why BASF continue to drive forward its focus on customers and their needs. BASF is
refining its organizational structure so that its operating divisions can flexibly address specific market
requirements and differentiate themselves from the competition. In addition, BASF is simplifying and
digitalizing its processes to make the way it works more effective, more efficient and more agile.
BASF is continuously increasing transparency for its customers and improving its customer service with a
range of measures. For instance, BASF has used the Net Promoter System® since 2019. BASF is
constantly improving its problem-solving skills, product quality and delivery reliability based on customer
feedback. In 2020, BASF also started the global rollout of Salesforce, a new, integrated IT-based customer
relationship management system. The user-friendly application helps sales employees deliver even better
customer support and simplifies their work.
Above and beyond this, BASF wants to intensify cooperation with its customers and leverage growth
potential together with them. For instance, BASF has created interdisciplinary teams in its business units
to even better and more quickly address the needs of its most important customers. Cooperation and
innovation are also the focus at its Creation Centers in Ludwigshafen, Germany; Mumbai, India; Shanghai,
China; and Yokohama, Japan. These creative centers bring together its comprehensive materials, design,
and in particular its digital development expertise in high-performance plastics using the latest visualization
and collaboration technologies. This enables BASF to transform its customers’ ideas into tailored products
and applications even more quickly – everything in one place, from initial inspiration to solution.


                                       MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS
Under the German Securities Trading Act (Wertpapierhandelsgesetz, WpHG) shareholders and individuals
having access to voting rights are obliged to notify the issuer and the Federal Financial Supervisory
Authority (Bundesanstalt für Finanzdienstleistungsaufsicht, BaFin) immediately when reaching, exceeding
or falling below the thresholds of 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 50 or 75% of the voting rights in a publicly listed
company either through the acquisition or disposal of shares or other financial instruments or by any other
means (Sections 33, 38 and 39 WpHG).
For details of the history of notifications received by BASF where holders exceeded or fell below any of the
statutory notification thresholds mentioned above refer to:
https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/share-and-adrs/shareholder-structure/notification-of-voting-
rights.html
The information on this website does not form part of the Prospectus and has not been scrutinised or
approved by the Commission.
Based on notifications received by BASF pursuant to Section 33 Paragraph 1 of the WpHG BASF is, as of
the date of this Prospectus, not aware of any shareholder owning 10% or more of BASF's outstanding
shares.
To BASF's knowledge, BASF is not directly or indirectly controlled or owned by another cooperation, by
any government, or by any other natural or legal person, acting severally or jointly, and there are no
arrangements which may result in a change of control.


                                        MATERIAL CONTRACTS
BASF Group did not enter into any contracts in the ordinary course of business, which could result in any
member of the BASF Group being under an obligation or an entitlement that is material to BASF's ability to
meet its obligations to the Holders in respect of the Notes.


                                         LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
General
BASF Group companies are involved in legal, regulatory, governmental and arbitration proceedings in
Germany and a number of foreign jurisdictions, including the United States, involving claims by and
against them, which arise in the ordinary course of their businesses, including in connection with their
business activities, employers, investors and taxpayers. It is not feasible to predict or determine the
ultimate outcome of the ending or threatened proceedings. The management does not believe that the
outcome of these proceedings, including those discussed below, will have or have had in the 12 months
                                                     57


preceding the date of this Prospectus significant effects on the financial position or profitability of BASF
and/or BASF Group after consideration of any applicable reserves.

Specific proceedings
BASF Corporation has potential liability under the Comprehensive Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980, as amended, and related state laws for investigation and cleanup at certain sites. The Lower
Passaic River Study Area ("LPRSA") is one such site comprising the lower 17 miles of the Passaic River
in New Jersey. BASF Corporation and more than 60 other companies (collectively, the Lower Passaic
River Study Area Cooperating Parties Group or CPG) agreed to complete a remedial investigation /
feasibility study (RI/FS) of the LPRSA. In 2016, the United States Environmental Protection Agency
("USEPA") selected a final remedy for the lower eight miles of the LPRSA. A decision from USEPA on a
targeted approach for the upper portion of the LPRSA was issued on September 30, 2021. BASF
Corporation established a provision covering BASF’s currently estimated share of the remediation costs.
Between November 2014 and March 2015, a punative class action lawsuit and several additional lawsuits
were filed in the United States District Court of the Southern District of New York against BASF Metals
Limited ("BML"), based in the United Kingdom, along with other defendants, alleging violations of antitrust
and commodities laws stemming from the price discovery process for platinum and palladium. The
lawsuits were consolidated, and a Second Consolidated Amended Class Action Complaint naming, among
others, BASF Corporation, was eventually filed in July 2015 and dismissed on jurisdictional grounds on
March 28, 2017. On May 15, 2017, the plaintiffs filed an amended Complaint that renews allegations
against defendants and BML, while BASF Corporation is not named as a defendant. The defendants filed
a renewed Joint Motion to Dismiss and BML filed a renewed Motion to Dismiss. In 2018 and 2019, no
further developments in this proceeding occurred. A pro se complaint filed in September 2015 that was not
consolidated into the Second Consolidated Amended Class Action Complaint was ultimately dismissed as
of November 18, 2019. The plaintiffs filed a notice of appeal against this decision with the Court of Appeals
for the 2nd Circuit and whereas BASF has filed to notice to dismiss the appeal. No oral hearing has yet
been scheduled by the court.
On February 14/15, 2020, a jury in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri
awarded $15 million in compensatory damages and $250 million in punitive damages against defendants
Monsanto Company and BASF Corporation. The verdict relates to alleged yield losses of a peach farmer
in connection with the use of the dicamba herbicide. BASF and Monsanto filed posttrial motions to
challenge the jury’s verdict. On November 25, 2020, the trial court ruled on the post-trial motions, and the
punitive damages award was reduced from $250 million to $60 million. The court did not grant any other
relief related to the jury’s verdict. BASF and Monsanto filed notices of appeal on December 18, 2020. A
hearing on the appeal took place in February 2022, the decision by the court is still pending.
Since August 2019, BASF Corporation has been served in various U.S. federal and state lawsuits alleging
property and resource damages and personal injuries from possible exposure to per- and polyfluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS). In December 2018, a multidistrict litigation (MDL) was created to coordinate claims
brought against manufacturers, distributors, and suppliers of Aqueous Film Forming Foam (AFFF) in
particular, which plaintiffs allege contains toxic levels of certain PFAS compounds including
perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) and perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS). Plaintiffs typically allege that
exposure to AFFF has caused loss of use and enjoyment of property, diminished property value,
remediation costs, and personal injuries including various types of cancers. The complaints name BASF
as a defendant in connection with its 2009 acquisition of Ciba Specialty Chemicals Inc. and the legacy
Ciba/BASF Lodyne fluorochemical product lines. BASF has been named in over 1,300 suits as of March
2022 and is defending all litigation.
At this time, BASF cannot predict the outcomes of resolving these matters or what potential actions may
be taken by regulatory agencies. An adverse outcome in any one or more of these matters could be
material to BASF’s financial results.
Furthermore, BASF SE and its affiliated companies are defendants in or parties to a variety of judicial,
arbitrational or regulatory proceedings on a recurring basis. To BASF's current knowledge, none of these
proceedings will have a material effect on the economic situation of BASF Group.


                         SIGNIFICANT CHANGES/TREND INFORMATION
There have been no significant changes in the financial position of BASF Group since June 30, 2022.
There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of BASF Group since the date of the last
published audited financial statements as of December 31, 2021. There has not been any significant
                                                      58


change in the financial performance of BASF Group since June 30, 2022, the end of the last financial
period for which financial information has been published, to the date of the Prospectus.


                                                OUTLOOK
Economic development in the first half of 2022 was volatile. Following a subdued start to the first quarter of
2022 with wide regional variance (moderate growth in gross domestic product in the E.U. and Asia, slight
decline in North America), the economy slowed in the second quarter of 2022. As a result, global gross
domestic product largely stagnated in the second quarter compared with the previous quarter. Despite
slowing growth momentum, global gross domestic product in the first half of 2022 was around 3.0% higher
than in the first half of 2021.
A range of different effects contributed to the economic slowdown over the course of the first half of 2022:
The temporary lockdowns in major Chinese cities reduced consumer demand in China and simultaneously
led to supply shortfalls as a result of production shutdowns and disruptions to logistics chains. Moreover,
prices for energy and raw materials rose sharply following the outbreak of the war of aggression on
Ukraine. The U.S. Federal Reserve has already reacted to rising inflation rates with a significant tightening
of monetary policy, which had a braking effect on industries such as construction. Declining share prices
on the stock market and the resulting effects on wealth also curbed consumption in the United States. In
the E.U. countries highly dependent on gas supplies from Russia, uncertainty among consumers and
producers rose considerably.
Based on preliminary data as well as some estimates, global industrial production expanded by around
3.5% in the first half of 2022 compared with the prior-year period. Overall, the lockdowns in China in the
second quarter dampened growth momentum in the manufacturing sector, as production slowed in China
and other regions lacked intermediate goods from China. Demand varied in BASF’s customer industries.
Global automotive production declined by around 1.8% year on year in the first half of the year. This was
partially due to supply chain disruptions. The war in Ukraine restricted wire harness supplies for European
automotive manufacturers. The global semiconductor shortage continued but the situation is gradually
improving. In China, automotive demand was temporarily weakened by the lockdowns.
The production of consumables (health and nutrition, care products) and consumer durables (textiles,
furniture) continued to grow compared with the previous year. Production also increased year on year in
the electric and electronics industries. The picture was mixed in the construction industry, with growing
demand in the E.U. but a downturn in the United States and China. Construction activity in the United
States and E.U. was curbed by rising interest rates. Nevertheless, demand for construction materials
remained high in the first half of 2022. Global agricultural output rose significantly, with the strong decline
in output in Ukraine offset by higher volumes in other regions.
Global chemical production expanded by around 2.5% in the first half of 2022. Growth rates varied widely
by region. In the E.U., chemical production declined slightly overall. By contrast, the United States
recorded strong growth of 6.5% due to base effects following the restrictions to production caused by a
winter storm in the prior-year period. In China, the world’s largest chemical market, chemical production
rose by 4%.
The price of oil averaged $107 per barrel (Brent crude) in the first half of 2022, significantly above the
average for the prior-year period ($65 per barrel). The war of aggression on Ukraine and the sanctions on
Russia saw the average oil price jump from $87 per barrel in January to $122 per barrel in June. In
Europe, average gas prices (TTF) rose from $7.76 per mmBtu in the first half of 2021 to more than
quadruple this amount ($31.94 per mmBtu) in the first half of 2022. Average gas prices in the United
States (Henry Hub) almost doubled in the same period, from $3.40 per mmBtu to $6.41 per mmBtu.
The assessment of the global economic environment in 2022 was adjusted as follows (previous
assumptions from the BASF Report 2021 in parentheses; current growth assumptions are rounded):

       Growth in gross domestic product: +2.5% (+3.8%)
       Growth in industrial production: +3.0% (+3.8%)
       Growth in chemical production: +2.5% (+3.5%)
       Average euro/dollar exchange rate of $1.07 per euro ($1.15 per euro)
       Average annual oil price (Brent crude) of $110 per barrel ($75 per barrel)

For the second half of the year, BASF anticipates a gradual cooling of economic development globally, but
much more pronounced in Europe. This assumes that there are no severe restrictions resulting from new
lockdowns in China and that natural gas shortages do not lead to production shutdowns in Europe.
                                                     59


Current developments, mainly driven by the war in Ukraine and its impact on energy and raw materials
prices and the availability of raw materials, especially in Europe, may lead to additional headwinds,
deviating from the assumptions presented above. In particular, risks could arise from production
stoppages at major European sites as a result of further restrictions to European gas supplies from
Russia. In this case, the loss of European capacities could be partially compensated for by higher plant
capacity utilization at sites outside of Europe. Further risks could arise from the future course of the
coronavirus pandemic and new measures to contain the number of infections. Opportunities could arise
from continued high margins, even in the case of an economic slowdown. BASF is responding to the
economic slowdown with cost reduction measures.
For the remaining opportunity and risk factors, the statements made in the BASF Report 2021 continue to
apply overall. According to the company’s assessment, neither existing individual risks nor the sum of
individual risks pose a threat to the continued existence of the BASF Group.
The sufficient supply of natural gas in Europe remains the greatest uncertainty. A continuous supply of
natural gas according to demand is essential to chemical production. Around 60% of the natural gas
consumed by BASF in Europe is used to generate the energy (steam and electricity) needed for
production. Around 40% of natural gas is used as a raw material to produce important basic chemicals and
a wide range of products in the downstream value chains supplying almost all sectors of industry.
The consequences would vary depending on the duration and extent of supply restrictions, the existence
of alternative supply sources and possible substitutions, as well as any optimization of production to
reduce the use of natural gas. It is therefore not possible to quantify the risks with sufficient accuracy.


                                            RECENT EVENTS
   On April 29, 2022, at the Annual Shareholders’ Meeting, the shareholders voted to renew the
    authorization to allow the buy-back of BASF's own shares.
   On April 29, 2022, at the Annual Shareholders' Meeting, the shareholders approved a dividend of 3.40
    per share as proposed by the Board of Executive Directors.
   As announced on April 27, 2022, BASF wound down nearly all of its remaining business activities in
    Russia and Belarus at the beginning of July 2022. Exempt from this decision is business to support
    food production, as the war risks triggering a global food crisis. This decision is driven by the recent
    developments of the war in Ukraine and in international law, including the E.U. sanctions packages. In
    2021, Russia and Belarus accounted for around 1% of the BASF Group's total sales. 684 employees
    work for BASF in Russia and in Belarus. BASF has decided to continue to support its employees in
    both countries until the end of 2022. Prior to this on March 3, 2022, BASF announced that effective
    immediately, it would only conduct business in Russia and Belarus to fulfill existing commitments in line
    with the applicable laws, regulations and international rules.
   On April 12, 2022, BASF and Allianz Capital Partners (on behalf of Allianz insurance companies)
    closed the purchase of 25.2% of the Hollandse Kust Zuid (HKZ) offshore wind farm by Allianz Capital
    Partners following the approval of the relevant authorities. BASF had acquired 49.5% of HKZ from
    Vattenfall in the third quarter of 2021. BASF will receive most of the power produced by its originally
    acquired share of 49.5% of HKZ under a long-term fixed-price power purchasing agreement.
   In connection with the sanctions imposed on the Nord Stream 2 pipeline project and its operating
    company, the Management Board of Wintershall Dea AG, Kassel/Hamburg, Germany, decided on
    March 2, 2022, to write off its financing of Nord Stream 2 in the total amount of around €1 billion
    (BASF's share: €729 million). In addition, Wintershall Dea recognized impairments of around €550
    million (BASF's share: €373 million after taxes) in connection with the war in Ukraine. The current
    situation is so dominated by uncertainty that BASF did not believe it possible to reliably value the
    Russian assets, even using scenarios. Consequently, BASF has not recognized any impairments on
    Wintershall Dea's assets beyond those recognized by Wintershall Dea. Wintershall Dea's Russian
    activities account for around €2.6 billion of the carrying amount of BASF's shareholding. An impairment
    test was performed for Wintershall Dea's Russian assets as of June 30, 2022. This did not reveal any
    need for adjustment above and beyond the impairments recognized by Wintershall Dea in the first
    quarter.
The following changes in responsibilities to two Board of Executive Directors departments ("Ressorts")
took effect as of March 1, 2022:
– Saori Dubourg (Ressort IV) assumed responsibility for the Petrochemicals, Intermediates, Performance
  Materials and Monomers divisions. She remains responsible for the region Europe.
                                                     60


– Michael Heinz (Ressort V), based in Florham Park, New Jersey, assumed responsibility for the Care
  Chemicals, Nutrition & Health and Agricultural Solutions divisions. He remains responsible for the
  regions North America and South America.
   Together with Heraeus, Hanau, Germany, BASF announced on February 11, 2022, the formation of a
    joint venture (BASF: 50%; Heraeus: 50%) to recover precious metals from spent automotive catalysts.
    BASF HERAEUS (China) Metal Resource Co., Ltd., based in Pinghu, China, was formed in early May
    2022. Construction of the joint venture's recycling plant is scheduled to begin in 2022, with start of
    operations in 2023.
   On January 4, 2022, the Board of Executive Directors of BASF SE resolved on a share buyback
    program with a volume of up to €3 billion. This started on January 11, 2022, and is to be completed by
    December 2023. The share buyback program was initially based on the authorization by the Annual
    Shareholders' Meeting on May 12, 2017. The program was continued after the renewed authorization
    to purchase own shares had been granted by the Annual Shareholders' Meeting of BASF SE on April
    29, 2022.
   On December 28, 2021, BASF reached an agreement to divest its production site in Quincy, Florida,
    and the associated attapulgite business to Clariant for a purchase price of $60 million. The Quincy
    facility employs around 75 employees and manufactures clay-based mineral products used in a variety
    of industrial applications. The transaction affects the Dispersions & Resins division and is expected to
    close in the summer of 2022, subject to the approval of the relevant antitrust authorities.
   On December 7, 2021, it was announced that BASF is to carve out its mobile emissions catalysts
    business. The new standalone structure will prepare the business for the upcoming changes in the
    internal combustion engine market and allow for future strategic options. The new entity will continue to
    operate globally and comprise approximately 20 production sites and over 4,000 employees. The
    carve-out process will start in January 2022 and is expected to take up to 18 months.
   On December 6, 2021, BASF and Allianz Capital Partners, on behalf of Allianz Insurance Companies
    (Allianz), announced that they had reached an agreement on the purchase of 25.2% of the Hollandse
    Kust Zuid (HKZ) wind farm by Allianz. This follows a transaction between Vattenfall and BASF under
    which BASF acquired 49.5% of HKZ from Vattenfall on September 1, 2021. BASF will continue to
    receive most of the power produced by its originally acquired share of 49.5% of HKZ under a long-term
    fixed-price corporate power purchasing agreement.
   On November 30, 2021, BASF completed the sale of the precision microchemicals business to
    Entegris. The transaction included fixed assets and inventories. The purchase price amounted to
    $90 million. The precision microchemicals business was part of the Surface Treatment business unit of
    BASF's Coatings division, operating under the Chemetall brand.
   On November 18, 2021, BASF and KaMin LLC. / CADAM S.A. (KaMin) signed an agreement to sell
    BASF's kaolin minerals business to KaMin, a global performance minerals company headquartered in
    Macon, Georgia. Currently, the kaolin minerals business is part of BASF's Performance Chemicals
    division and has approximately 440 employees in North America, Europe and Asia. The divestiture
    comprises the production hub with sites in Daveyville, Toddville, Edgar, Gordon and related mines,
    reserves and mills in Toomsboro and Sandersville in Georgia. The refinery catalysts operations located
    at the same site are not part of the divestiture. Pending approval by the relevant authorities, closing of
    the transaction is expected in the second half of 2022.
   On November 9, 2021, BASF and Clayton, Dubilier & Rice sold their shares in Solenis to Platinum
    Equity, a private equity company based in Beverly Hills, California. With over 5,200 employees, Solenis
    serves customers in water-intensive industries by helping them solve complex water treatment and
    process improvement challenges. BASF held a 49% share in Solenis after transferring its paper and
    water chemicals business to the company in February 2019. This was reported as a non-integral
    investment accounted for using the equity method. The remaining 51% of the shares were held by
    funds managed by Clayton, Dubilier & Rice, and by Solenis management. The purchase price
    attributable to BASF was €1.1 billion.
   On September 1, 2021, it was announced that BASF completed the purchase of 49.5% of Vattenfall's
    wind farm Hollandse Kust Zuid (HKZ). The purchase price amounts to €0.3 billion. Including BASF's
    contribution to fund the wind farm construction, BASF's total commitment amounts to around €1.6
    billion.
   On August 31, 2021, following the approval of all relevant authorities, the new BASF and Shanshan
    joint venture "BASF Shanshan Battery Materials Co., Ltd" was formed. This BASF majority-owned joint
    venture (BASF: 51%; Shanshan: 49%) has been formed to produce cathode active materials (CAM)
    and precursors (PCAM) in China.
                                                    61


   On July 6, 2021, BASF and Clayton, Dubilier & Rice announced, the signing of an agreement to sell
    Solenis to Platinum Equity, a private equity company based in Los Angeles, California. The transaction
    implies an enterprise value for Solenis of $5.25 billion. That amount includes net financial debt of
    around $2.5 billion, subject to any adjustments at closing. Since February 1, 2019, BASF has held a
    49% share in Solenis and has reported its share in the company using the equity method; 51% of the
    shares are held by funds managed by Clayton, Dubilier & Rice, and by Solenis management.
   On June 30, 2021, BASF closed the divestiture of its global pigments business which BASF agreed to
    sell to DIC, Tokyo, Japan on August 29, 2019. The purchase price on a cash and debt-free basis was
    €1.15 billion.
   On June 16, 2021, the shareholders of Wintershall Dea – BASF and LetterOne – decided to postpone
    the initial public offering to a later date due to current market conditions.
                                                  62


                          BASF FINANCE EUROPE N.V. AS ISSUER

                                         STATUTORY AUDITORS

The independent auditors of BASF Finance are BDO Audit & Assurance B.V., P.O. Box 71730, 1008 DE
Amsterdam, Krijgsman 9, 1186 DM Amstelveen, The Netherlands. The auditor signing on behalf of BDO
Audit & Assurance B.V. is a member of the Royal Netherlands Institute of Chartered Accountants
(Koninklijke Nederlandse Beroepsorganisatie van Accountants). BDO Audit & Assurance B.V. have
audited the financial statements of BASF Finance for the years 2021 and 2020 which were prepared in
accordance with Dutch GAAP and have issued an unqualified opinion.
Investors should read the information below together with the financial statements of BASF Finance,
including the notes thereto, and the other financial information that is included elsewhere in, or
incorporated by reference into, this Prospectus.


                               SELECTED FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The financial information below was extracted from the audited financial statements of BASF Finance for
the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 and from the unaudited half-year reports 2022 and 2021.
All statements have been prepared in accordance with Dutch GAAP.

                                                         January 1, 2022 -          January 1, 2021 -
                                                          June 30, 2022              June 30, 2021
                                                                       thousand EUR
Sales                                                                       -                          -
Financial result                                                          183                      30
Other operating expenses                                                   85                    108
Net income                                                                 70                    (78)

                                                          June 30, 2022               June 30, 2021
                                                                       thousand EUR
Total assets                                                         711,739                 686,630
Stockholders' equity                                                   6,193                   8,559
Noncurrent liabilities                                               689,330                 664,381
Current liabilities                                                   16,216                   13,690
Current ratio                                                           1.39                     1.63



                                                        January 1, 2021 –           January 1, 2020 –
                                                        December 31, 2021           December 31, 2020
                                                                                         thousand EUR
Sales                                                                           -                          -
Financial result                                                             337                (2,067)
Other operating expenses                                                     227                      211
Tax on result from ordinary activities                                       (24)                     564
Net income                                                                    86                (1,714)


                                                        December 31, 2021           December 31, 2020
                                                                       thousand EUR
Total assets                                                           694,738                 680,054
Stockholders' equity                                                      6,123                  8,637
Provisions                                                                      -                          -
Noncurrent liabilities                                                 673,026                 658,725
                                                    63



Current liabilities                                                       15,589                   12,692

                                           for the Financial Year ended         for the second quarter
                                                      Dec. 31                    period ended June 30
 EUR thousand                                2021               2020               2022         2021
 Cash flows from operating activities               159                  989          987           1,016
 Cash flows from financing activities                 -          (1,000,000)              -              -
 Cash flows from investing activities                 -           1,000,000               -              -


                              HISTORICAL FINANCIAL INFORMATION
The audited financial statements of BASF Finance for the fiscal year ending on December 31, 2020 and
the auditor's report thereon, contained in the Financial Report on pages 10-26, are incorporated by
reference into this Prospectus.
The audited financial statements of BASF Finance for the fiscal year ending on December 31, 2021 and
the auditor's report thereon, contained in the Financial Report on pages 10-26, are incorporated by
reference into this Prospectus.
The unaudited interim financial statements of BASF Finance as of June 30, 2022, contained in the Semi-
Annual Report 2022 on pages 9-25, are incorporated by reference into this Prospectus.


                        GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT BASF FINANCE

BASF Finance Europe N.V. was incorporated on April 22, 1976 under the laws of The Netherlands as a
public limited liability company (naamloze vennootschap). It is operating under the laws of The
Netherlands. The company has its corporate seat in Arnhem, The Netherlands and is registered with the
trade register of the Dutch chamber of commerce (Handelsregister van de Kamer van Koophandel) under
number 09041351. Its registered office is: Velperplein 23, 6811 AH Arnhem, The Netherlands (telephone:
0031-26371 7171).
BASF Finance acts solely to facilitate the financing of BASF Group. All debt securities of BASF Finance
(such as the Notes) are wholly and unconditionally guaranteed by BASF in respect of principal and interest
payments. Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) of BASF Finance is 724500670HAI5ERPDA03. The website of
BASF Finance is www.basf.com. The information on this website does not form part of the Prospectus and
has not been scrutinised or approved by the Commission.


                                  ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE

BASF Finance is a wholly owned subsidiary of BASF and has no subsidiaries of its own.
Management Bodies
Management Board
The Management Board consists of the following members:
   Frank Wilhelmi, Eppelheim, Germany, Vice President Corporate Finance of BASF SE.
   R.J. Holtermann, Arnhem, The Netherlands, Director of BASF Nederland B.V.
   I.J. Hoekstra, Arnhem, The Netherlands, General Manager of BASF Nederland B.V.
None of the above members of the Management Board have any conflict of interests between any duties
to BASF Finance and their private interests or other duties.
The members of the Management Board may be contacted at BASF Finance's business address:
Velperplein 23, 6811 AH Arnhem, The Netherlands.
Supervisory Board
The Supervisory Board consists of the following members:
   Oliver Nussbaum, Wachenheim, Germany, Senior Vice President Tax of BASF SE
                                                      64


   Birka Benecke, Mannheim, Germany, Senior Vice President Corporate Treasury of BASF SE
   Cornelis Maria Becx, Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Head of Legal & Insurances, BASF Nederland B.V.
None of the above members of the Supervisory Board have any potential conflict of interests between any
duties to BASF Finance and their private interests or other duties.
The members of the Supervisory Board may be contacted at BASF Finance's business address:
Velperplein 23, 6811 AH Arnhem, The Netherlands.


        BUSINESS OVERVIEW – PRINCIPAL ACTIVITIES AND PRINCIPAL MARKETS

According to Article (2) of its Articles of Association, BASF Finance acts to facilitate the financing of BASF
Group by taking loans from and issuing notes to the market and on-lending the funds to companies within
BASF Group. The business of BASF Finance is directly related to the extent BASF SE utilizes BASF
Finance for future funding needs. The extent future funding needs arise depends on the development of
the operating business and investment projects of BASF SE and its subsidiaries.


                            LEGAL AND ARBITRATION PROCEEDINGS
There are no, nor have there been any governmental, legal or arbitration proceedings and BASF Finance
is not aware of any such proceedings pending or threatened which may have or have had in the 12
months preceding the date of this Prospectus a significant effect on the financial position or profitability of
BASF Finance or BASF Group.


                         SIGNIFICANT CHANGES/TREND INFORMATION
There have been no significant changes in the financial position of BASF Finance since June 30, 2022.
There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of BASF Finance since the date of the last
published audited financial statements as of December 31, 2021. No developments are currently foreseen
that are reasonably likely to have a material negative effect on BASF Finance's prospects. There has not
been any significant change in the financial performance of BASF Group since June 30, 2022, the end of the
last financial period for which financial information has been published, to the date of the Prospectus.


                                     ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Share capital
The authorized share capital of BASF Finance amounts to €2,086,875. It is divided into 46,375 ordinary
registered shares with a nominal value of €45 each. Each share represents one vote. All issued shares
have fully been paid up. All shares are registered shares. No share certificates have been nor will be
issued.
Credit rating
BASF Finance itself is not rated by any rating agency. BASF guarantees the payment of interest on and
principal of the Notes issued by BASF Finance. For detailed information about the BASF rating please
refer to chapter "BASF SE as Issuer and Guarantor – Organizational Structure – Credit ratings".
                                                     65




                                    TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES
                                        ENGLISH LANGUAGE VERSION
Introduction         The Terms and Conditions of the Notes (the "Terms and Conditions") are set forth
                     below for two options:

                     Option I comprises the set of Terms and Conditions that apply to Tranches of Notes
                     with fixed interest rates.

                     Option II comprises the set of Terms and Conditions that apply to Tranches of Notes
                     with floating interest rates.

                     The set of Terms and Conditions for each of these Options contains certain further
                     options, which are characterized accordingly by indicating the respective optional
                     provision through instructions and explanatory notes set out either on the left of or in
                     square brackets within the set of Terms and Conditions.

                     In the Final Terms the Issuer will determine, which of Option I or Option II including
                     certain further options contained therein, respectively, shall apply with respect to an
                     individual issue of Notes, either by replicating the relevant provisions or by referring to
                     the relevant options.

                     To the extent that upon the approval of the Prospectus neither the Issuer nor the
                     Guarantor had knowledge of certain items which are applicable to an individual issue
                     of Notes, this Prospectus contains placeholders set out in square brackets which
                     include the relevant items that will be completed by the Final Terms.

In the case the      [The provisions of these Terms and Conditions apply to the Notes as completed by
Final Terms          the terms of the final terms which are attached hereto the "Final Terms"). The blanks
applicable to an
individual issue
                     in the provisions of these Terms and Conditions which are applicable to the Notes
only refer to the    shall be deemed to be completed by the information contained in the Final Terms as if
further options      such information were inserted in the blanks of such provisions; alternative or optional
contained in the     provisions of these Terms and Conditions as to which the corresponding provisions of
set of Terms and     the Final Terms are not completed or are deleted shall be deemed to be deleted from
Conditions for
Option I or Option
                     these Terms and Conditions; and all provisions of these Terms and Conditions which
II, the following    are inapplicable to the Notes (including instructions, explanatory notes and text set out
applies              in square brackets) shall be deemed to be deleted from these Terms and Conditions,
                     as required to give effect to the terms of the Final Terms. Copies of the Final Terms
                     may be obtained free of charge at the specified office of the Fiscal Agent and at the
                     principal office of the Issuer provided that, in the case of Notes which are not listed on
                     any stock exchange, copies of the relevant Final Terms will only be available to
                     Holders of such Notes.]
                     OPTION I – Terms and Conditions that apply to Notes with fixed interest rates


                                          TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES
                                              ENGLISH LANGUAGE VERSION

                                                     §1
                               CURRENCY, DENOMINATION, FORM, CERTAIN DEFINITIONS
                     (1) Currency; Denomination. This Series of Notes (the "Notes") of [BASF SE] [BASF
                     Finance Europe N.V.] (["BASF"]["BASF Finance"] or the "Issuer") is being issued in
                     [Specified Currency] (the "Specified Currency") in the aggregate principal amount
                     [in the case the global note is an NGN the following applies: , subject to § 1(4),] of
                     [aggregate principal amount] (in words: [aggregate principal amount in words])
                     in the denomination of [specified denomination] (the "Specified Denomination").
                     (2) Form. The Notes are being issued in bearer form.
In the case of       [(3) Permanent Global Note. The Notes are represented by a permanent global note
Notes which are      (the "Permanent Global Note") without coupons. The Permanent Global Note shall
represented
                                                    66


by a Permanent       be signed by authorized signatories of the Issuer and shall be authenticated by or on
Global Note the      behalf of the Fiscal Agent. Definitive Notes and interest coupons will not be issued.]
following applies
(for Notes issued
in compliance with
the C Rules and/or
Notes kept in
custody by or on
behalf of CDS)


In the case of       [(3) Temporary Global Note – Exchange.
Notes which are
initially            (a) The Notes are initially represented by a temporary global note (the "Temporary
represented by a         Global Note") without coupons. The Temporary Global Note will be exchangeable
Temporary                for Notes in the Specified Denomination represented by a permanent global note
Global Note the
following applies        (the "Permanent Global Note") without coupons. The Temporary Global Note and
(for Notes issued        the Permanent Global Note shall each be signed by authorized signatories of the
in compliance with       Issuer and shall each be authenticated by or on behalf of the Fiscal Agent.
the D Rules)             Definitive Notes and interest coupons will not be issued.
                     (b) The Temporary Global Note shall be exchangeable for the Permanent Global Note
                         from a date 40 days after the date of issue of the Notes represented by the
                         Temporary Global Note. Such exchange shall only be made upon delivery of
                         certifications to the effect that the beneficial owner or owners of the Notes
                         represented by the Temporary Global Note is not a U.S. person (other than certain
                         financial institutions or certain persons holding Notes through such financial
                         institutions) as required by U.S. tax law. Payment of interest on Notes represented
                         by a Temporary Global Note will be made only after delivery of such certifications.
                         A separate certification shall be required in respect of each such payment of
                         interest. Any such certification received on or after the 40th day after the date of
                         issue of the Notes represented by the Temporary Global Note will be treated as a
                         request to exchange such Temporary Global Note pursuant to this subparagraph
                         (b) of this § 1(3). Any securities delivered in exchange for the Temporary Global
                         Note shall be delivered only outside of the United States (as defined in § 6(2)).]
                     (4) Clearing System. The global note representing the Notes will be kept in custody by
                     [or on behalf of the Clearing System. "Clearing System" means [If more than one
                     Clearing System the following applies: each of] the following: [Clearstream
                     Banking AG, Neue Börsenstr. 1, 60487 Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of
                     Germany, ("CBF")] [Clearstream Banking S.A., 42 Avenue JF Kennedy, 1855
                     Luxembourg, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, ("CBL") and Euroclear Bank SA/NV,
                     Boulevard du Roi Albert II, 1210 Brussels, Belgium, ("Euroclear") (CBL and Euroclear
                     each an "ICSD" and together the "ICSDs")] and any successor in such capacity.]
                     [CDS & Co., as nominee for CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc. ("CDS", or
                     the "Clearing System").]
In the case of
Notes kept in        [The Notes are issued in new global note ("NGN") form and are kept in custody by a
custody on behalf    common safekeeper on behalf of both ICSDs.
of the ICSDs and
the global note is   The aggregate principal amount of Notes represented by the global note shall be the
an NGN the           aggregate amount from time to time entered in the records of both ICSDs. The
following applies    records of the ICSDs (which expression means the records that each ICSD holds for
                     its customers which reflect the amount of such customer's interest in the Notes) shall
                     be conclusive evidence of the aggregate principal amount of Notes represented by the
                     global note and, for these purposes, a statement issued by a ICSD stating the amount
                     of Notes so represented at any time shall be conclusive evidence of the records of the
                     relevant ICSD at that time.
                     On any redemption or payment of interest being made in respect of, or purchase and
                     cancellation of, any of the Notes represented by the global note the Issuer shall
                     procure that details of any redemption, payment or purchase and cancellation (as the
                     case may be) in respect of the global note shall be entered accordingly in the records
                     of the ICSDs and, upon any such entry being made, the aggregate principal amount of
                     the Notes recorded in the records of the ICSDs and represented by the global note
                     shall be reduced by the aggregate principal amount of the Notes so redeemed or
                     purchased and cancelled.
                     [In the case the Temporary Global Note is an NGN the following applies: On an
                                                      67


                       exchange of a portion only of the Notes represented by a Temporary Global Note, the
                       Issuer shall procure that details of such exchange shall be entered accordingly in the
                       records of the ICSDs.]]

In the case of         [The Notes are issued in classical global note ("CGN") form and are kept in custody
Notes kept in          by a common depositary on behalf of both ICSDs.]
custody on behalf
of the ICSDs and
the global note is a
CGN the following
applies


In the case of         [Beneficial interests in the Permanent Global Note will be represented through book-
Notes which are        entry accounts of financial institutions acting on behalf of beneficial owners as direct
represented
by a Permanent
                       and indirect participants in CDS. Interests in the Permanent Global Note may be held
Global Note kept in    by participants of such systems directly through any of CDS, 85, Richmond Street
custody by or on       West, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5H 2C9 (in Canada), Clearstream Banking S.A., 42
behalf of CDS the      Avenue JF Kennedy, 1855 Luxembourg, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, ("CBL") and
following applies      Euroclear Bank SA/NV, Boulevard du Roi Albert II, 1210 Brussels, Belgium,
                       ("Euroclear") (CBL and Euroclear each an "ICSD" and together the "ICSDs") (in
                       Europe), or indirectly through organizations which are participants in such systems.
                       Euroclear and CBL will hold interests on behalf of their participants through
                       customers' securities accounts in their respective names on the books of their
                       respective Canadian subcustodians, each of which is a Canadian Schedule I
                       chartered bank ("Canadian Subcustodians"), which in turn will hold such interests in
                       customers' securities accounts in the names of the Canadian Subcustodians on the
                       books of CDS.
                       For so long as any of the Notes are represented by the Permanent Global Note, the
                       Issuer, the Fiscal Agent and any other paying agents shall treat CDS & Co., or any
                       other nominee appointed by CDS, as the sole holder of such Permanent Global Note
                       for all purposes. The Notes represented by the Permanent Global Note will be
                       transferable only in accordance with the rules and procedures of CDS. Direct rights
                       can only be exercised in accordance with the Terms and Conditions and the rules and
                       procedures of CDS.
                       No beneficial owner of the Notes will be entitled to receive physical delivery of Notes
                       in definitive form except in the limited circumstances described below. If the Notes
                       represented by the Permanent Global Note are held by or on behalf of CDS and (i)
                       CDS has notified the Issuer that it is unwilling or unable to continue to act as a
                       depository for the Notes and a successor depository is not appointed by the Issuer
                       within 90 Payment Business Days (as defined in § 4(4)) after receiving such notice; or
                       (ii) CDS ceases to be a recognized clearing agency under the Securities Act (Ontario)
                       or a self-regulatory organization under the Securities Act (Québec) or other applicable
                       Canadian securities legislation and no successor clearing system satisfactory to the
                       Issuer is available within 90 Payment Business Days of the Issuer becoming aware
                       that CDS is no longer so recognized, the Issuer will issue, or cause to be issued,
                       definitive Notes in exchange for the Permanent Global Note.]
                       (5) Holder of Notes. "Holder" means any holder of a proportionate co-ownership or [In
                       the case of Notes which are represented by a Permanent Global Note kept in
                       custody by or on behalf of CDS the following applies: (except as otherwise
                       provided in § 1(4) above and § 4(1) below)] other beneficial interest or right in the
                       Notes.
                                                    68




                                                     §2
                       STATUS, NEGATIVE PLEDGE OF THE ISSUER[, GUARANTEE AND NEGATIVE
                                          PLEDGE OF THE GUARANTOR]
                      (1) Status. The obligations under the Notes constitute unsecured and unsubordinated
                      obligations of the Issuer ranking pari passu among themselves and pari passu with all
                      other unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Issuer, unless such obligations
                      are accorded priority under mandatory provisions of statutory law.
                      (2) Negative Pledge. The Issuer undertakes, as long as any Notes are outstanding,
                      but only up to the time all amounts of principal and interest have been placed at the
                      disposal of the Fiscal Agent, not to provide security upon any of its assets for any
                      present or future Capital Market Indebtedness or any guarantees or other indemnities
                      resulting therefrom, without at the same time having the Holders share equally and
                      ratably in such security or such other security as shall be approved by an independent
                      accounting firm of internationally recognized standing as being equivalent security.
                      "Capital Market Indebtedness" means any obligation for the repayment of borrowed
                      money which is in the form of, or represented or evidenced by, bonds, notes or other
                      securities, with an original maturity of more than one year, which are, or are capable
                      of being, quoted, listed, dealt in or traded on a stock exchange or other recognized
                      securities market.
In the case of        [(3) Guarantee and Negative Pledge of the Guarantor. BASF (the "Guarantor") has
Notes issued by       given its unconditional and irrevocable guarantee (the "Guarantee") for the due and
BASF Finance the
following applies
                      punctual payment of principal of, and interest on, and any other amounts payable
                      under any Note. The Guarantor has further undertaken in a negative pledge (the
                      "Negative Pledge"), so long as any of the Notes are outstanding, but only up to the
                      time all amounts of principal and interest have been placed at the disposal of the
                      Fiscal Agent, not to provide security upon any of its assets for any present or future
                      Capital Market Indebtedness (as defined above) or any guarantees or other
                      indemnities resulting therefrom, without at the same time having the Holders share
                      equally and ratably in such security as shall be approved by an independent
                      accounting firm of internationally recognized standing as being equivalent security.
                      The Guarantee and Negative Pledge constitute a contract for the benefit of the
                      Holders from time to time as third party beneficiaries in accordance with § 328
                      German Civil Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BGB), giving rise to the right of each
                      Holder to require performance of the Guarantee and the Negative Pledge directly from
                      the Guarantor and to enforce the Guarantee and the Negative Pledge directly against
                      the Guarantor.]

                                                              §3
                                                           INTEREST
                      (1) Rate of Interest and Interest Payment Dates.
If the Notes are      [The Notes shall bear interest on their aggregate principal amount at the rate of [Rate
endowed with a        of Interest]% per annum from (and including) [Interest Commencement Date] to
constant interest
rate the following
                      (but excluding) the Maturity Date (as defined in § 5(1)). Interest shall be payable in
applies               arrear on [Fixed Interest Date or Dates] in each year (each such date, an "Interest
                      Payment Date").]

If the Notes are      [The Notes shall bear interest on their aggregate principal amount as follows which
endowed with          shall be payable in arrears on the relevant Interest Payment Date:
different interest
rates the following
applies
                                 From                            To
                             (and including)               (but excluding)           per cent. per annum

                           [specified dates]             [specified dates]            [specified rates]]
                                                        (each such date, an
                                                     "Interest Payment Date")
                                                            69




                         The first payment of interest shall be made on [First Interest Payment Date] [If First
                         Interest Payment Date is not first anniversary of Interest Commencement Date
                         the following applies: and will amount to [Initial Broken Amount per Specified
                         Denomination].] [If Maturity Date is not a Fixed Interest Date the following
                         applies: Interest in respect of the period from (and including) [Fixed Interest Date
                         preceding the Maturity Date] to (but excluding) the Maturity Date will amount to
                         [Final Broken Amount per Specified Denomination].]
                         (2) Accrual of Interest. If the Issuer shall fail to redeem the Notes when due, interest
                         shall continue to accrue beyond the due date until the actual redemption of the Notes
                         at the default rate of interest established by law.(1)
                         (3) Calculation of Interest for Partial Periods. If interest is required to be calculated for
                         a period of less than a full year, such interest shall be calculated on the basis of the
                         Day Count Fraction (as defined below).
                         (4) Day Count Fraction. "Day Count Fraction" means with regard to the calculation of
                         interest on any Note for any period of time (the "Calculation Period"):
In the case of           [the actual number of days in the Calculation Period divided by the actual number of
Actual/Actual            days in the respective Interest Period.]
(ICMA Rule 251)
with annual
interest payments
(excluding the case
of short or long
coupons) the
following applies


In the case of           [the number of days in the Calculation Period divided by the number of days in the
Actual/Actual            Reference Period in which the Calculation Period falls.]
(ICMA Rule 251)
with annual
interest payments
(including the case
of short coupons)
the following
applies


In the case of           [the number of days in the Calculation Period divided by the product of (1) the number
Actual/Actual            of days in the Reference Period in which the Calculation Period falls and (2) the
(ICMA Rule 251)
with two or more
                         number of Interest Payment Dates that occur in one calendar year or that would occur
constant interest        in one calendar year if interest were payable in respect of the whole of such year.]
periods within an
interest year
(including in the
case of short
coupons) the
following applies


In the case of           [the sum of:
Actual/Actual
(ICMA Rule 251) is       (a)   the number of days in such Calculation Period falling in the Reference Period in
applicable and if              which the Calculation Period begins divided by [In the case of Reference
the Calculation                Periods of less than one year the following applies: the product of (x)] the
Period is longer
than one Reference             number of days in such Reference Period [In the case of Reference Periods
Period (long                   of less than one year the following applies: and (y) the number of Interest
coupon) the                    Payment Dates that occur in one calendar year or that would occur in one
following applies              calendar year if interest were payable in respect of the whole of such year]; and
                         (b)   the number of days in such Calculation Period falling in the next Reference
                               Period divided by [In the case of Reference Periods of less than one year


(1)   The default rate of interest established by law is five percentage points above the basic rate of interest published by
      Deutsche Bundesbank from time to time; §§ 288 paragraph 1, 247 paragraph 1 German Civil Code (Bürgerliches
      Gesetzbuch, BGB).
                                                      70


                           the following applies: the product of (x)] the number of days in such Reference
                           Period [In the case of Reference Periods of less than one year the following
                           applies: and (y) the number of Interest Payment Dates that occur in one
                           calendar year or that would occur in one calendar year if interest were payable
                           in respect of the whole of such year].


The following         ["Reference Period" means the period from (and including) the Interest
applies for all       Commencement Date to, but excluding, the first Interest Payment Date or from (and
options of Actual/
Actual (ICMA Rule
                      including) each Interest Payment Date to, but excluding the next Interest Payment
251) except for       Date. [In the case of a short first or last Calculation Period the following applies:
option                For the purposes of determining the relevant Reference Period only, [deemed
Actual/Actual         Interest Payment Date] shall be deemed to be an Interest Payment Date.] [In the
(ICMA Rule 251)       case of a long first or last Calculation Period the following applies: For the
with annual
                      purposes of determining the relevant Reference Period only, [deemed Interest
interest payments
(excluding the case   Payment Dates] shall each be deemed to be an Interest Payment Date].]
of short or long
coupons)


In the case of        [the actual number of days in the Calculation Period divided by 365.]
Actual/365 (Fixed)
the following
applies


In the case of        [the number of days in the Calculation Period divided by 360, the number of days to
30/360, 360/360 or    be calculated on the basis of a year of 360 days with 12 30-day months (unless (A)
Bond Basis the
following applies
                      the last day of the Calculation Period is the 31st day of a month, but the first day of
                      the Calculation Period is a day other than the 30th or 31st day of a month, in which
                      case the month that includes that last day shall not be considered to be shortened to a
                      30-day month, or (B) the last day of the Calculation Period is the last day of the month
                      of February in which case the month of February shall not be considered to be
                      lengthened to a 30-day month).]

In the case of        [the number of days in the Calculation Period divided by 360 (the number of days to
30E/360 or            be calculated on the basis of a year of 360 days with 12 30-day months, without
Eurobond Basis
the following
                      regard to the date of the first day or last day of the Calculation Period).]
applies


In the case of        [(5) Interest Act (Canada). For purposes of the disclosure required under the Interest
Notes denominated     Act (Canada), whenever any interest is calculated on the basis of a period of time
in CAD and kept in
custody by or on
                      other than a calendar year, the annual rate of interest to which each implied rate of
behalf of CDS the     interest applicable to such calculation is equivalent for the purposes of the Interest Act
following applies     (Canada) is such implied rate multiplied by the actual number of days in the calendar
                      year in which the same is to be ascertained and divided by the number of days used
                      in the basis of such determination. The foregoing sentence is a disclosure statement
                      required by Canadian law and, for greater certainty, nothing in this subparagraph (5)
                      modifies in any way how interest is calculated on the Notes for any period.]

                                                               §4
                                                            PAYMENTS
In the case of        (1) [(a) Payment of Principal. Payment of principal in respect of Notes shall be made,
principal and
interest payable on   subject to subparagraph (2) below, to the Clearing System or to its order for credit to
a global note kept    the accounts of the relevant account holders of the Clearing System.
in custody by CBF
or on behalf of the
ICSDs the
following applies

                      (b) Payment of Interest. Payment of interest on Notes shall be made, subject to sub-
                      paragraph (2), to the Clearing System or to its order for credit to the relevant account
                      holders of the Clearing System.
                                                      71



In the case of        [Payment of interest on Notes represented by the Temporary Global Note shall be
interest payable on   made, subject to subparagraph (2), to the Clearing System or to its order for credit to
a Temporary
Global Note the
                      the relevant account holders of the Clearing System, upon due certification as
following applies     provided in § 1(3)(b).]]


In the case of        [Payment of Principal and Interest, Discharge. Principal and interest payments in
principal and
interest payable on
                      respect of the Notes will be made to CDS & Co., or any other nominee appointed by
a Permanent           CDS, and CDS will distribute the payment received to the relevant securities
Global Note kept in   accounts. CDS & Co., or any other nominee appointed by CDS, which shall be treated
custody by or on      as the sole holder of the Permanent Global Note, shall be the only person entitled to
behalf of CDS the
following applies
                      receive payments in respect of the Notes represented by such Permanent Global Note
                      and the Issuer shall be discharged by payment to or to the order of, the sole holder of
                      such Permanent Global Note for each amount so paid. Each person shown in the
                      records of CDS as the beneficial owner of a particular principal amount of the Notes
                      represented by the Permanent Global Note must look solely to CDS for his, her or its
                      share of each payment so made by the Issuer to, or to the order of, the sole holder of
                      the Permanent Global Note. No person other than the holder of the Permanent Global
                      Note shall have any claim against the Issuer in respect of any payments due on such
                      Permanent Global Note.]
                      (2) Manner of Payment. Subject to (i) applicable fiscal and other laws and regulations
                      and (ii) any withholding or deduction required pursuant to an agreement described in
                      Section 1471(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the "Code") or otherwise
                      imposed pursuant to Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code, any regulations or
                      agreements thereunder, any official interpretations thereof, or any law implementing
                      an intergovernmental approach thereto, [In the case of Notes denominated in
                      Renminbi, the following applies: and subject to a settlement at the U.S. Dollar
                      Equivalent due to Inconvertibility, Non-transferability or Illiquidity in accordance with
                      subparagraph (7)], payments of amounts due in respect of the Notes shall be made in
                      the Specified Currency.
In the case of        [(3) Discharge. The Issuer shall be discharged by payment to, or to the order of, the
principal and         Clearing System.]
interest payable on
a global note kept
in custody by CBF
or on behalf of the
ICSDs the
following applies

                      [(4)] Payment Business Day. If the date for payment of any amount in respect of any
                      Note is not a Payment Business Day then the Holder shall not be entitled to payment
                      until the next such day in the relevant place and shall not be entitled to further interest
                      or other payment in respect of such delay.
                      For these purposes, "Payment Business Day" means any day which is
In the case of        [a day (other than a Saturday or a Sunday) on which commercial banks and foreign
Notes not             exchange markets settle payments in [relevant financial centre(s)] and on which the
denominated in
EUR the following
                      Clearing System is open to effect payments.]
applies


In the case of        [a day (other than a Saturday or a Sunday) on which the Clearing System as well as
Notes denominated     all relevant parts of the Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross Settlement
in EUR, the
following applies
                      Express Transfer System 2 ("TARGET") are open to effect payments].

                      [(5)] References to Principal and Interest. References in these Terms and Conditions
                      to principal in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to include, as applicable: the
                      Final Redemption Amount of the Notes; the Early Redemption Amount of the Notes;
                      [If redeemable at the option of the Issuer for other than tax reasons the
                      following applies: the Call Redemption Amount of the Notes;] [If redeemable at the
                      option of the Holder the following applies: the Put Redemption Amount of the
                      Notes;] [If redeemable at option of the Issuer upon publication of a Transaction
                      Trigger Notice the following applies: the Trigger Call Redemption Amount;] and
                                                   72


                    any premium and any other amounts which may be payable under or in respect of the
                    Notes. References in these Terms and Conditions to interest in respect of the Notes
                    shall be deemed to include, as applicable, any Additional Amounts which may be
                    payable under § 7.
                    [(6)] Deposit of Principal and Interest. The Issuer may deposit with the local court
                    (Amtsgericht) in Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany, principal or interest
                    not claimed by Holders within twelve months after the Maturity Date, even though
                    such Holders may not be in default of acceptance of payment. If and to the extent that
                    the deposit is effected and the right of withdrawal is waived, the respective claims of
                    such Holders against the Issuer shall cease.
In the case of      [(7) (a) Payment Postponement or U.S. Dollar Equivalent Settlement.
Notes denominated
in Renminbi, the    Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary in the Terms and Conditions, if by
following applies   reason of Inconvertibility, Non-transferability or Illiquidity (each a "RMB Currency
                    Event"), the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case
                    may be, the Guarantor] determines (in good faith and in a commercially reasonable
                    manner) that it is not able to satisfy in full payments in respect of the Notes [In the
                    case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, in respect of the
                    Guarantee] when due in RMB in Hong Kong, the Issuer [In the case of Notes
                    issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] may [If early
                    redemption at the option of the Issuer for Inconvertibility, Non-transferability or
                    Illiquidity is applicable, the following applies:, subject to an early redemption
                    pursuant to § 5([7]),] at its sole discretion (i) postpone the relevant payment to two
                    Business Days after the date on which the RMB Currency Event ceases to exist
                    unless the RMB Currency Event continues to exist 14 consecutive days after the
                    relevant due date, or (ii) settle any such payment in U.S. dollars on the due date at
                    the U.S. Dollar Equivalent of any such RMB amount. If the Issuer [In the case of
                    Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] decides to
                    postpone the relevant payment and the RMB Currency Event continues to exist for
                    more than 14 consecutive days after the relevant due date, the Issuer [In the case of
                    Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] will settle
                    the relevant payment in U.S. dollars on the Business Day following the 14 th
                    consecutive day after the relevant due date at the U.S. Dollar Equivalent of any such
                    RMB amount. Upon the determination that an RMB Currency Event has occurred, the
                    Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the
                    Guarantor] shall by no later than 14:00 (Hong Kong time) on the Rate Calculation
                    Date, (i) notify the Calculation Agent (as defined in § 6), and (ii) instruct the
                    Calculation Agent to notify the Holders in accordance with § 13, of the occurrence of
                    an RMB Currency Event and the decision of the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued
                    by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] to postpone payments or
                    to settle payments in U.S. dollars, as the case may be. In such circumstances, the
                    Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the
                    Guarantor] shall procure the giving of such notice to the Holders as soon as
                    reasonably practicable in accordance with § 13. In the case of payments made under
                    this § 4[(7)](a), no interest shall accrue from and including the relevant due date of
                    the Notes to and including the day of actual redemption of the Notes.
                    (b) U.S. Dollar Payments. If the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF
                    Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] decides to settle payments in U.S.
                    dollars, payments of the U.S. Dollar Equivalent of the relevant RMB amount will be
                    made to the person(s) in accordance with this § 4. Payment made in accordance
                    therewith shall discharge the obligations of the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued
                    by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] in respect of that payment
                    under the Notes [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case
                    may be, in respect of the Guarantee].
                    (c) Unavailability of Spot Rate. If (a) the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by
                    BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] decides to settle payments in
                    U.S. dollars, and (b) it becomes impossible to obtain the Spot Rate on the Rate
                    Calculation Date, the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as
                    the case may be, the Guarantor] may at its sole discretion postpone the Rate
                    Calculation Date to the next Business Day on which the Spot Rate can be obtained
                    unless the unavailability of the Spot Rate continues for up to 15 consecutive days
                    after the day that, but for the unavailability of the Spot Rate, would have been the
                                 73


Rate Calculation Date (the "Initial Rate Calculation Date"). If the Issuer [In the case
of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] decides
to postpone the Rate Calculation Date and the Spot Rate does not become available
until the 15th consecutive day after the Initial Rate Calculation Date, the Business Day
first succeeding the 15th consecutive day after the Initial Rate Calculation Date shall
be the Rate Calculation Date. If the Rate Calculation Date is postponed the relevant
due date for payments will be postponed to the second Business Day after the Rate
Calculation Date. The Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as
the case may be, the Guarantor] shall without undue delay after it has determined
that it becomes impossible to obtain the Spot Rate on the Rate Calculation Date (i)
notify the Calculation Agent, and (ii) instruct the Calculation Agent to notify the
Holders in accordance with § 13, of the unavailability of the Spot Rate and the
decision of the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the
case may be, the Guarantor] to postpone the Rate Calculation Date or to instruct the
Calculation Agent to determine the Spot Rate. In such circumstances, the Issuer [In
the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor]
shall procure the giving of such notice to the Holders as soon as reasonably
practicable in accordance with § 13. In the case of payments made under this
§ 4[(7)](c), no interest shall accrue from and including the relevant due date of the
Notes to and including the day of actual redemption of the Notes.
(d) Definitions. For the purposes of this subparagraph (7), the following terms shall
have the following meanings:
"Governmental Authority" means any de facto or de jure government (or any
agency or instrumentality thereof), court, tribunal, administrative or other
governmental authority of Hong Kong or any other entity (private or public) charged
with the regulation of the financial markets (including the central bank) of Hong Kong.
"Hong Kong" means the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's
Republic of China.
"Illiquidity" means the general RMB exchange market in Hong Kong becomes
illiquid, other than as a result of an event of Inconvertibility or Non-transferability, as a
result of which the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the
case may be, the Guarantor] cannot, having used its reasonable endeavours, obtain
sufficient RMB in order to fully satisfy its obligation to make payments in respect of
the Notes [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be,
in respect of the Guarantee].
"Inconvertibility" means that it is impossible or, where reasonable endeavours have
been made, impracticable, to convert any amount due in respect of the Notes [In the
case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, in respect of the
Guarantee] in the general RMB exchange market in Hong Kong, other than where
such impossibility or impracticability is due solely to the failure of the Issuer [In the
case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] to
comply with any law, rule or regulation enacted by any Governmental Authority
(unless such law, rule or regulation is enacted after the relevant Issue Date of the
Notes and it is impossible or, having used its reasonable endeavours, impracticable
for the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may
be, the Guarantor], due to an event beyond its control, to comply with such law, rule
or regulation).
"Non-transferability" means that it is impossible or, where reasonable endeavours
have been made, impracticable, to deliver RMB between accounts inside Hong Kong
or from an account inside Hong Kong to an account outside Hong Kong, other than
where such impossibility or impracticability is due solely to the failure of the Issuer [In
the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor]
to comply with any law, rule or regulation enacted by any Governmental Authority
(unless such law, rule or regulation is enacted after the relevant Issue Date of the
Notes and it is impossible or, having used its reasonable endeavours, impracticable
for the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may
be, the Guarantor], due to an event beyond its control, to comply with such law, rule
or regulation).
"Rate Calculation Date" means the day which is two Business Days before the due
date of the relevant payment under these Terms and Conditions subject to an
                                                    74


                     adjustment in accordance with subparagraph (7)(c) above.
                     "Spot Rate" means the arithmetic mean of the offer and the bid U.S. Dollar/RMB spot
                     exchange rate for the purchase of U.S. Dollars with RMB in the over-the-counter RMB
                     exchange market in Hong Kong for settlement in two Business Days, as determined
                     by the Calculation Agent at or around 11.00 a.m. (Hong Kong time) on the Rate
                     Calculation Date, on a deliverable basis by reference to Reuters Screen Page
                     TRADCNY3 under the column USD/CNH, or if no such rates are available, on a non-
                     deliverable basis by reference to Reuters Screen Page TRADNDF or the respective
                     successor pages. If neither rate is available, the Calculation Agent will determine the
                     Spot Rate at or around 11.00 a.m. (Hong Kong time) on the Rate Calculation Date as
                     the most recently available U.S. Dollar/RMB official fixing rate for settlement in two
                     Business Days reported by The State Administration of Foreign Exchange of the
                     People's Republic of China, which is reported on the Reuters Screen Page
                     CNY=SAEC. Reference to a page on the Reuters Screen means the display page so
                     designated on the Reuter Monitor Money Rates Service (or any successor service) or
                     such other page as may replace that page for the purpose of displaying a comparable
                     currency exchange rate.
                     "U.S. Dollar Equivalent" of an RMB amount means the relevant RMB amount
                     converted into U.S. dollars using the Spot Rate for the relevant Rate Calculation Date
                     as determined by the Calculation Agent and promptly notified to the Issuer [In the
                     case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor].
                     "Business Day" means for the purposes of this § 4(7) a day (other than a Saturday or
                     Sunday) on which commercial banks are open for general business (including
                     dealings in foreign exchange) in [Hong Kong, Beijing].
                     (e) References. References to "RMB" are to the lawful currency of the mainland
                     People's Republic of China, excluding Hong Kong, the Macau Special Administrative
                     Region of the People's Republic of China and Taiwan.
                     (f) Determinations Binding. All notifications, opinions, determinations, certificates,
                     calculations, quotations and decisions given, expressed, made or obtained for the
                     purposes of these provisions by the Calculation Agent, will (in the absence of wilful
                     default, bad faith or manifest error) be binding on the Issuer [In the case of Notes
                     issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor], the Agents and
                     all Holders.]

                                                             §5
                                                         REDEMPTION
                     (1) Final Redemption. Unless previously redeemed in whole or in part or purchased
                     and cancelled [In the case of Notes denominated in Renminbi, the following
                     applies: or, as the case may be, subject to a Payment Postponement pursuant to
                     § 4(7)], the Notes shall be redeemed at their Final Redemption Amount on [Maturity
                     Date] (the "Maturity Date"). The "Final Redemption Amount" in respect of each
                     Note shall be its principal amount.
In the case of       [(2) Early Redemption for Reasons of Taxation. If as a result of any change in, or
Notes issued by      amendment to, the laws or regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany or any
BASF the following
applies
                     political subdivision or taxing authority thereto or therein affecting taxation or the
                     obligation to pay duties of any kind, or any change in, or amendment to, an official
                     interpretation or application of such laws or regulations, which amendment or change
                     is effective on or after the date on which the last tranche of this series of Notes was
                     issued, the Issuer is required to pay Additional Amounts (as defined in § 7 herein) on
                     the next succeeding Interest Payment Date (as defined in § 3(1)), and this obligation
                     cannot be avoided by the use of reasonable measures available to the Issuer, the
                     Notes may be redeemed, in whole, but not in part, at the option of the Issuer, upon
                     not more than 60 days', but not less than 30 days' prior notice of redemption given to
                     the Fiscal Agent and, in accordance with § 13 to the Holders, at their Early
                     Redemption Amount (as defined below), together with interest accrued to the date
                     fixed for redemption.
                     However, no such notice of redemption may be given (i) earlier than 90 days prior to
                     the earliest date on which the Issuer would be obligated to pay such Additional
                     Amounts were a payment in respect of the Notes then due, or (ii) if at the time such
                                                   75


                    notice is given, such obligation to pay such Additional Amounts does not remain in
                    effect.]

In the case of      [(2) Early Redemption for Reasons of Taxation. If as a result of any change in, or
Notes issued by     amendment to, the laws or regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany or The
BASF Finance the
following applies
                    Netherlands or any political subdivision or taxing authority thereto or therein affecting
                    taxation or the obligation to pay duties of any kind, or any change in, or amendment
                    to, an official interpretation or application of such laws or regulations, which
                    amendment or change is effective on or after the date on which the last tranche of this
                    series of Notes was issued, the Issuer or the Guarantor is required to pay Additional
                    Amounts (as defined in § 7 herein) on the next succeeding Interest Payment Date (as
                    defined in § 3(1)), and this obligation cannot be avoided by the use of reasonable
                    measures available to the Issuer or the Guarantor, as the case may be, the Notes
                    may be redeemed, in whole but not in part, at the option of the Issuer, upon not more
                    than 60 days' nor less than 30 days' prior notice of redemption given to the Fiscal
                    Agent and, in accordance with § 13 to the Holders, at their Early Redemption Amount
                    (as defined below), together with interest accrued to the date fixed for redemption.
                    However, no such notice of redemption may be given (i) earlier than 90 days prior to
                    the earliest date on which the Issuer or the Guarantor would be obligated to pay such
                    Additional Amounts were a payment in respect of the Notes then due, or (ii) if at the
                    time such notice is given, such obligation to pay such Additional Amounts does not
                    remain in effect.]
                    Any such notice shall be given in accordance with § 13. It shall be irrevocable, must
                    specify the date fixed for redemption and must set forth a statement in summary form
                    of the facts constituting the basis for the right of the Issuer so to redeem.
If the Notes are    [(3) Change of Control. If there occurs a Change of Control and within the Change of
subject to Early    Control Period a Rating Downgrade in respect of that Change of Control occurs
Redemption for
Reasons of a
                    (together called a "Put Event"), each Holder will have the option (unless, prior to the
Change of Control   giving of the Put Event Notice referred to below, the Issuer gives notice to redeem the
the following       Notes in accordance with § 5(2)) to require the Issuer to redeem that Note on the
applies             Optional Redemption Date at its principal amount together with interest accrued to but
                    excluding the Optional Redemption Date.
                    For the purposes of such option:
                    "Rating Agency" means each of the rating agencies of S&P Global Ratings Europe
                    Limited ("S&P"), Moody's Deutschland GmbH ("Moody's") and Fitch Ratings Ireland
                    Limited ("Fitch") or any of their respective successors or any other rating agency of
                    equivalent international standing specified from time to time by BASF;
                    A "Rating Downgrade" shall be deemed to have occurred in respect of a Change of
                    Control if within the Change of Control Period any rating previously assigned to BASF
                    or the Notes by any Rating Agency is (i) withdrawn or (ii) changed from an investment
                    grade rating (BBB- by S&P and Fitch/Baa3 by Moody's, or its equivalent for the time
                    being, or better) to a non-investment grade rating (BB+ by S&P and Fitch/Ba1 by
                    Moody's, or its equivalent for the time being, or worse);
                    A "Change of Control" shall be deemed to have occurred at each time (whether or
                    not approved by the Board of Executive Directors or Supervisory Board of BASF) that
                    any person or persons ("Relevant Person(s)") acting in concert (as defined in § 30
                    (2) of the German Securities Acquisition and Takeover Act (Wertpapiererwerbs- und
                    Übernahmegesetz)) or any person or persons acting on behalf of any such Relevant
                    Person(s), at any time directly or indirectly acquire(s) or come(s) to own such number
                    of the shares in the capital of BASF carrying more than 50% of the voting rights;
                    "Change of Control Period" means the period ending 120 days after the occurrence
                    of the Change of Control; and
                    The "Optional Redemption Date" is the fifteenth day after the last day of the Put
                    Period.
                    Promptly upon the Issuer becoming aware that a Put Event has occurred, the Issuer
                    shall give notice (a "Put Event Notice") to the Holders in accordance with § 13
                    specifying the nature of the Put Event and the circumstances giving rise to it and the
                    procedure for exercising the option set out in this § 5(3).
                                                      76



                      In order to exercise such option, the Holder must send to the specified office of the
                      Fiscal Agent an early redemption notice in text format (Textform, e.g. email or fax) or
                      in written form ("Put Notice") within the period of 45 days after a Put Event Notice (the
                      "Put Period") has been given. In the event that the Put Notice is received after 5:00
                      p.m. Frankfurt am Main time on the 45th after the Put Event Notice has been given,
                      the option shall not have been validly exercised. The Put Notice must specify (i) the
                      total principal amount of the Notes in respect of which such option is exercised and (ii)
                      the securities identification numbers of such Notes, if any. The Put Notice may be in
                      the form available from the specified offices of the Fiscal Agent in the German and
                      English language and includes further information. No option so exercised may be
                      revoked or withdrawn. The Issuer shall only be required to redeem Notes in respect of
                      which such option is exercised against delivery of such Notes to the Issuer or to its
                      order.]


If the Notes are      [[(4)] Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer.
subject to Early
Redemption at the     (a) The Issuer may, upon notice given in accordance with clause (b), redeem all or
Option of the             some only of the Notes on the Call Redemption Date(s) or at any time thereafter until
Issuer at specified       the respective subsequent Call Redemption Date at the respective Call Redemption
Call Redemption
Amounts the               Amount(s) set forth below together with accrued interest, if any, to (but excluding) the
following applies         respective redemption date.

                                 Call Redemption Date(s)                      Call Redemption Amount(s)
                                [Call Redemption Date(s)]                   [Call Redemption Amount(s)]
                           [                                 ]          [                                    ]
                           [                                 ]          [                                    ]

                         [If Notes are subject to Early Redemption at the Option of the Holder the
                         following applies: The Issuer may not exercise such option in respect of any Note
                         which is the subject of the prior exercise by the Holder thereof of its option to
                         require the redemption of such Note under subparagraph [(6)] of this § 5.]
                      (b) Notice of redemption shall be given by the Issuer to the Holders of the Notes in
                          accordance with § 13. Such notice shall specify:
                          (i)   the Series of Notes subject to redemption;
                         (ii) whether such Series is to be redeemed in whole or in part only and, if in part
                              only, the aggregate principal amount of the Notes which are to be redeemed;
                         (iii) the redemption date, which shall be not less than 30 days nor more than 60
                               days after the date on which notice is given by the Issuer to the Holders; and
                         (iv) the Call Redemption Amount at which such Notes are to be redeemed.
                      (c) In the case of a partial redemption of Notes, Notes to be redeemed shall be
                          selected in accordance with the rules and procedures of the relevant Clearing
                          System. [In the case of Notes in NGN form the following applies: Such partial
                          redemption shall be reflected in the records of CBL and Euroclear as either a pool
                          factor or a reduction in aggregate principal amount, at the discretion of CBL and
                          Euroclear.]]

If the Notes are      [[(5)] Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer.
subject to Early
Redemption at the     (a) The Issuer may, upon notice given in accordance with clause (b), at any time
Option of the             redeem all or some only of the Notes (each a "Early Call Redemption Date") at the
Issuer at Early           Early Redemption Amount together with accrued interest, if any, to (but excluding)
Redemption
Amount the                the respective Early Call Redemption Date.
following applies

                         [If Notes are subject to Early Redemption at the Option of the Holder the
                         following applies: The Issuer may not exercise such option in respect of any
                         Note which is the subject of the prior exercise by the Holder thereof of its option to
                         require the redemption of such Note under subparagraph [(6)] of this § 5.]
                                                      77



                      (b) Notice of redemption shall be given by the Issuer to the Holders of the Notes in
                          accordance with § 13. Such notice shall specify:
                         (i)   the Series of Notes subject to redemption;
                         (ii) whether such Series is to be redeemed in whole or in part only and, if in part
                              only, the aggregate principal amount of the Notes which are to be redeemed;
                              and
                         (iii) the Early Call Redemption Date, which shall be not less than 30 days nor
                               more than 60 days after the date on which notice is given by the Issuer to the
                               Holders.
                      (c) In the case of a partial redemption of Notes, Notes to be redeemed shall be
                          selected in accordance with the rules and procedures of the relevant Clearing
                          System. [In the case of Notes in NGN form the following applies: Such partial
                          redemption shall be reflected in the records of CBL and Euroclear as either a pool
                          factor or a reduction in aggregate principal amount, at the discretion of CBL and
                          Euroclear.]]

If the Notes are      [[(6)] Early Redemption at the Option of a Holder.
subject to Early
Redemption at the     (a) The Issuer shall, at the option of the Holder of any Note, redeem such Note on the
Option of the             Put Redemption Date(s) at the Put Redemption Amount(s) set forth below together
Holder at specified       with accrued interest, if any, to (but excluding) the Put Redemption Date.
Put Redemption
Amounts the
following applies

                                Put Redemption Date(s)                       Put Redemption Amount(s)
                               [Put Redemption Date(s)]                    [Put Redemption Amount(s)]
                           [                                ]          [                                   ]
                           [                                ]          [                                   ]

                         The Holder may not exercise such option in respect of any Note which is the
                         subject of the prior exercise by the Issuer of any of its options to redeem such
                         Note under this § 5.
                      (b) In order to exercise such option, the Holder must, not less than 30 days nor more
                          than 60 days before the Put Redemption Date on which such redemption is
                          required to be made as specified in the Put Notice (as defined below), send to the
                          specified office of the Fiscal Agent an early redemption notice in text format
                          (Textform, e.g. email or fax) or in written form ("Put Notice"). In the event that the
                          Put Notice is received after 5:00 p.m. Frankfurt am Main time on the 30th day
                          before the Put Redemption Date, the option shall not have been validly exercised.
                          The Put Notice must specify (i) the total principal amount of the Notes in respect of
                          which such option is exercised and (ii) the securities identification numbers of such
                          Notes, if any. The Put Notice may be in the form available from the specified
                          offices of the Fiscal Agent in the German and English language and includes
                          further information. No option so exercised may be revoked or withdrawn. The
                          Issuer shall only be required to redeem Notes in respect of which such option is
                          exercised against delivery of such Notes to the Issuer or to its order.]

In the case of        [[(7)] Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer for Inconvertibility, Non-
Notes                 transferability or Illiquidity. If by reason of Inconvertibility, Non-transferability or
denominated in
Renminbi and if
                      Illiquidity (each as defined in § 4(7)) the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by
such Notes are        BASF Finance: or, as the case may be, the Guarantor] is not able to satisfy in full
subject to early      payments in respect of the Notes [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance:
redemption at the     or, as the case may be, in respect of the Guarantee] when due in RMB in Hong Kong,
option of the         the Issuer [In the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance: or, as the case may be,
Issuer for
                      the Guarantor] having given not less than 10 nor more than thirty days' notice to the
Inconvertibility,
Non-transferability   Holders in accordance with § 13 (which notice shall be irrevocable), may, on expiry of
or Illiquidity, the   such notice, redeem the Notes, in whole, but not in part, at the U.S. Dollar Equivalent
following applies     (as defined in § 4(7)) of the Early Redemption Amount together (if applicable) with the
                      U.S. Dollar Equivalent of the interest accrued to (but excluding) the date fixed for
                                                      78


                       redemption.]

If the case Early      [[(8)] Purchase; Early Redemption for Reason of Minimal Outstanding Amount. The
Redemption       for
Reason of Minimal
                       Issuer may at any time purchase (which for the avoidance of doubt shall exclude any
Outstanding            (early) redemption as set out in these Terms and Conditions) Notes in the open
Amount            is   market or otherwise and at any price. Such acquired Notes may be cancelled, held or
applicable,     the    resold. In the event that the Issuer has purchased Notes equal to or in excess of 75%
following applies
                       of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes initially issued and the aggregate
                       principal amount of the Notes is reduced by this percentage in the global note
                       accordingly, the Issuer, having given not less than thirty nor more than sixty days'
                       notice to the Holders in accordance with § 13, may call and redeem the remaining
                       Notes (in whole but not in part) at the Final Redemption Amount plus accrued interest
                       until the date of redemption (exclusive).]

If the Notes are       [[(9)] Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer upon publication of a Transaction
subject to Early       Trigger Notice.
Redemption at the
Option of the          (a) The Issuer may, upon a Transaction Trigger Notice given in accordance with
Issuer upon                clause (b), redeem all or some only of the Notes at any time at the Trigger Call
publication of a
Transaction                Redemption Amount together with accrued interest, if any, to (but excluding) the
Trigger Notice at          respective redemption date. "Trigger Call Redemption Amount" means [Trigger
the Trigger Call           Call Redemption Amount].
Redemption
Amount the
following applies

                          "Transaction Trigger Notice" means a notice that the Transaction Trigger Event
                          has occurred. The Transaction Trigger Notice can only be given within 30 days
                          after the Transaction Trigger Event has occurred and only if the Transaction
                          Trigger Event has occurred within the Transaction Trigger Event Period.
                          "Transaction Trigger Event Period" means the period from [issue date] to [end
                          of period date].
                          "Transaction" means [description of transaction in respect of which the
                          Notes are issued for refinancing purposes or in relation to which the
                          occurrence of a Transaction Trigger Event shall give rise to the redemption
                          right].
                          "Transaction Trigger Event" means [Transaction has been terminated prior to
                          completion or that the Transaction will not be settled for any reason whatsoever or
                          that the Issuer has publicly stated that it no longer intends to pursue the
                          Transaction.] [description of the event in the context of the Transaction the
                          occurrence of which shall give rise to a redemption right]
                          [If Notes are subject to Early Redemption at the Option of the Holder the
                          following applies: The Issuer may not exercise such option in respect of any
                          Note which is the subject of the prior exercise by the Holder thereof of its option to
                          require the redemption of such Note under subparagraph [(6)] of this § 5.]
                       (b) The Transaction Trigger Notice shall be given by the Issuer to the Holders of the
                           Notes in accordance with § 13. Such notice shall specify:
                           (i) the Series of Notes subject to redemption;
                           (ii) whether such Series is to be redeemed in whole or in part only and, if in part
                           only, the aggregate principal amount of the Notes which are to be redeemed; and
                           (iii) the respective redemption date, which shall be not less than 30 days nor more
                           than 60 days after the date on which notice is given by the Issuer to the Holders.
                       (c) In the case of a partial redemption of Notes, Notes to be redeemed shall be
                           selected in accordance with the rules of the relevant Clearing System. [In the
                           case of Notes in NGN form the following applies: Such partial redemption shall
                           be reflected in the records of CBL and Euroclear as either a pool factor or a
                           reduction in the aggregate principal amount, at the discretion of CBL and
                           Euroclear.]]
                                                      79



                      [(10)] Early Redemption Amount. [(a)] For purposes of subparagraph (2) [and [(7)]] of
                      this § 5, the Early Redemption Amount of a Note shall be its Final Redemption
                      Amount.
If the Notes are      [(b) For purposes of subparagraph [(5)] of this § 5, the Early Redemption Amount of a
subject to Early      Note shall be the higher of (i) its Final Redemption Amount and (ii) the Present Value.
Redemption at the
Option of the
                      The Present Value will be calculated by the Calculation Agent by discounting the sum
Issuer at Early       of the principal amount of a Note and the remaining interest payments to [Maturity
Redemption            Date] on an annual basis, assuming a 365-day year or a 366-day year, as the case
Amount the            may be, and the actual number of days elapsed in such year and using the
following applies     Comparable Benchmark Yield plus [percentage]%. "Comparable Benchmark Yield"
                      means the yield at the Redemption Calculation Date on the corresponding [euro
                      denominated benchmark debt security of the Federal Republic of Germany] [UK
                      government Sterling denominated benchmark debt security issued by H.M. Treasury]
                      [Swiss franc denominated benchmark federal bond of the Swiss Confederation] [U.S.
                      dollar denominated benchmark U.S. Treasury debt security], as having a maturity
                      comparable to the remaining term of the Note to [Maturity Date], that would be used
                      at the time of selection and in accordance with customary financial practice, in pricing
                      new issues of corporate debt securities of comparable maturity to [Maturity Date].
                      "Redemption Calculation Date" means the third Payment Business Day prior to the
                      Call Redemption Date.]

                                                           §6
                                      THE FISCAL AGENT[,] [AND] THE PAYING AGENT
                                             [AND THE CALCULATION AGENT]
                      (1) Appointment; Specified Office. The initial Fiscal Agent[,] [and] the initial Paying
                      Agent [and the initial Calculation Agent] and their initial specified office[s] shall be:
The following         [Fiscal Agent           Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
applies except for    and Paying Agent:       Trust & Agency Services
a Permanent
Global Note kept in
                                              Taunusanlage 12
custody by or on                              60325 Frankfurt am Main
behalf of CDS                                 Federal Republic of Germany]

In the case of a      [Fiscal Agent and       [name and specified office of Canadian Fiscal Agent and
Permanent Global      Paying Agent:           Paying Agent]]
Note kept in
custody by or on
behalf of CDS the
following applies


If the Notes are      [Calculation Agent:    [name and specified office]]
subject to Early
Redemption at the
Option of the
Issuer at Early
Redemption
Amount or in the
case of Notes
denominated in
Renminbi the
following applies

                      The Fiscal Agent[,] [and] the Paying Agent [and the Calculation Agent] reserve the
                      right at any time to change their specified office[s] to some other specified office in the
                      same country.
                      (2) Variation or Termination of Appointment. The Issuer reserves the right at any time
                      to vary or terminate the appointment of the Fiscal Agent or any Paying Agent [or the
                      Calculation Agent] and to appoint another Fiscal Agent or additional or other Paying
                      Agents [or another Calculation Agent]. The Issuer shall at all times maintain [(i)] a
                      Fiscal Agent [In the case of payments in U.S. dollar the following applies: ,(ii) if
                      payments at or through the offices of all Paying Agents outside the United States (as
                      defined below) become illegal or are effectively precluded because of the imposition
                      of exchange controls or similar restrictions on the full payment or receipt of such
                      amounts in U.S. dollar, a Paying Agent with a specified office in New York City] [In
                                                    80


                     the case of a Permanent Global Note kept in custody by CDS the following
                     applies: , (iii) a Canadian Fiscal and Paying Agent having a specified office in
                     Toronto, Ontario, Canada] [If any Calculation Agent is to be appointed the
                     following applies: and [(iv)] a Calculation Agent]. Any variation, termination,
                     appointment or change shall only take effect (other than in the case of insolvency,
                     when it shall be of immediate effect) after not less than 30 days nor more than 45
                     days' prior notice thereof shall have been given to the Holders in accordance with
                     § 13. For purposes of these Terms and Conditions, "United States" means the United
                     States of America (including the States thereof and the District of Columbia) and its
                     possessions (including Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa,
                     Wake Island and Northern Mariana Islands).
                     (3) Agent of the Issuer. The Fiscal Agent[,] [and] the Paying Agent [and the
                     Calculation Agent] act solely as the agents of the Issuer and do not assume any
                     obligations towards or relationship of agency or trust for any Holder.

                                                              §7
                                                           TAXATION
In the case of       [All amounts payable in respect of the Notes shall be made without withholding or
Notes issued by      deduction for or on account of any present or future taxes or duties of whatever nature
BASF the following
applies
                     imposed or levied by way of withholding or deduction by or on behalf of the Federal
                     Republic of Germany or any political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein
                     having power to tax unless such withholding or deduction is required by law. If such
                     withholding is required by law, the Issuer will pay such additional amounts (the
                     "Additional Amounts") as shall be necessary in order that the net amounts received
                     by the Holders, after such withholding or deduction shall equal the respective
                     amounts which would otherwise have been receivable in the absence of such
                     withholding or deduction; except that no such Additional Amounts shall be payable on
                     account of any taxes or duties which:
                     (a) are payable by any person acting as custodian bank or collecting agent on behalf
                         of a Holder, or otherwise in any manner which does not constitute a deduction or
                         withholding by the Issuer from payments of principal or interest made by it, or
                     (b) are payable by reason of the Holder having, or having had, some personal or
                         business connection with the Federal Republic of Germany and not merely by
                         reason of the fact that payments in respect of the Notes are, or for purposes of
                         taxation are deemed to be, derived from sources in, or are secured in, the Federal
                         Republic of Germany, or
                     (c) are deducted or withheld pursuant to (i) any European Union Directive or
                         Regulation concerning the taxation of interest income, or (ii) any international
                         treaty or understanding relating to such taxation and to which the Federal Republic
                         of Germany or the European Union is a party, or (iii) any provision of law
                         implementing, or complying with, or introduced to conform with, such Directive,
                         Regulation, treaty or understanding, or
                     (d) are payable by reason of a change in law that becomes effective more than
                         30 days after the relevant payment becomes due, or is duly provided for and
                         notice thereof is published in accordance with § 13, whichever occurs later; or
                     (e) are payable by reason of the Holder residing in a non-cooperative state or territory
                         as defined in the German Defense Against Tax Haven Act (Gesetz zur Abwehr
                         von Steuervermeidung und unfairem Steuerwettbewerb – Steueroasen-
                         Abwehrgesetz) of June 25, 2021, as amended or replaced from time to time
                         (including any ordinance enacted based on this law).
                     The flat tax (Abgeltungssteuer) which has been in effect in the Federal Republic of
                     Germany since January 1, 2009 and the solidarity surcharge (Solidaritätszuschlag)
                     imposed thereon do not constitute a tax as described above in respect of which
                     Additional Amounts would be payable by the Issuer.]

In the case of       [All amounts payable in respect of the Notes or under the Guarantee shall be made
Notes issued by      without withholding or deduction for or on account of any present or future taxes or
BASF Finance the
following applies
                     duties of whatever nature imposed or levied by way of withholding or deduction by or
                                                    81


                     on behalf of The Netherlands or the Federal Republic of Germany or any political
                     subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax unless such
                     withholding or deduction is required by law. If such withholding is required by law, the
                     Issuer will pay such additional amounts (the "Additional Amounts") as shall be
                     necessary in order that the net amounts received by the Holders, after such
                     withholding or deduction shall equal the respective amounts which would otherwise
                     have been receivable in the absence of such withholding or deduction; except that no
                     such Additional Amounts shall be payable on account of any taxes or duties which:
                     (a) are payable by any person acting as custodian bank or collecting agent on behalf
                         of a Holder, or otherwise in any manner which does not constitute a deduction or
                         withholding by the Issuer from payments of principal or interest made by it, or
                     (b) are payable by reason of the Holder having, or having had, some personal or
                         business connection with The Netherlands or the Federal Republic of Germany
                         and not merely by reason of the fact that payments in respect of the Notes are, or
                         for purposes of taxation are deemed to be, derived from sources in, are deducted
                         or withheld pursuant to the application of the Dutch Withholding Tax Act 2021 (Wet
                         bronbelasting 2021), or are secured in, The Netherlands or the Federal Republic
                         of Germany, or
                     (c) are deducted or withheld pursuant to (i) any European Union Directive or
                         Regulation concerning the taxation of interest income, or (ii) any international
                         treaty or understanding relating to such taxation and to which the Federal Republic
                         of Germany or The Netherlands or the European Union is a party, or (iii) any
                         provision of law implementing, or complying with, or introduced to conform with,
                         such Directive, Regulation, treaty or understanding, or
                     (d) are payable by reason of a change in law that becomes effective more than
                         30 days after the relevant payment becomes due, or is duly provided for and
                         notice thereof is published in accordance with § 13, whichever occurs later.


                     The flat tax (Abgeltungssteuer) which has been in effect in the Federal Republic of
                     Germany since January 1, 2009 and the solidarity surcharge (Solidaritätszuschlag)
                     imposed thereon do not constitute a tax as described above in respect of which
                     Additional Amounts would be payable by the Issuer.]


                                                           §8
                                                   PRESENTATION PERIOD
                     The presentation period provided in § 801 paragraph 1, sentence 1 German Civil
                     Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BGB) is reduced to ten years for the Notes.

                                                           §9
                                                    EVENTS OF DEFAULT
In the case of       [(1) Events of default. Each Holder shall be entitled to declare his Notes due and
Notes issued by      demand immediate redemption thereof at their Final Redemption Amount plus
BASF the following
applies
                     accrued interest (if any) to the date of repayment, in the event that

                     (a) the Issuer fails to pay principal or interest within 30 days from the relevant due
                         date, or
                     (b) the Issuer fails duly to perform any other obligation arising from the Notes and
                         such failure continues unremedied for more than 30 days after the Fiscal Agent
                         has received notice thereof from a Holder, or
                     (c) any Capital Market Indebtedness (as defined in § 2 subparagraph (2)) or a
                         certificate of indebtedness (with an initial maturity of more than one year) of the
                         Issuer becomes prematurely repayable as a result of a default in respect of the
                         terms thereof, or the Issuer fails to fulfil any payment obligation in excess of EUR
                         200,000,000 or the equivalent thereof under any Capital Market Indebtedness or
                         under any certificate of indebtedness (with an initial maturity of more than one
                         year) or under any guarantees or suretyship given for any Capital Market
                         Indebtedness or a certificate of indebtedness (with an initial maturity of more than
                                                    82


                       one year) of others within 30 days from its due date or, in the case of a guarantee
                       or suretyship, within 30 days of such guarantee or security being invoked, unless
                       the Issuer shall contest in good faith that such payment obligation exists or is due
                       or that such guarantee or suretyship has been validly invoked, or if a security
                       granted in respect thereof is enforced on behalf of or by the creditor(s) entitled
                       thereto, or
                    (d) the Issuer announces its inability to meet its financial obligations generally or
                        ceases its payments, or
                    (e) a court opens insolvency proceedings against the Issuer; such proceedings are
                        instituted and have not been discharged or stayed within 60 days, or the Issuer
                        applies for or institutes such proceedings, or
                    (f) the Issuer ceases all or substantially all of its business operations or sells or
                        disposes of its assets or the substantial part thereof and thus (i) diminishes
                        considerably the value of its assets and (ii) for this reason it becomes likely that
                        the Issuer may not fulfil its payment obligations against the Holders, or
                    (g) the Issuer goes into liquidation unless this is done in connection with a merger or
                        other form of combination with another company or in connection with a
                        reorganization and such other or new company assumes all obligations contracted
                        by the Issuer in connection with the Notes.
                    The right to declare Notes due shall terminate if the situation giving rise to it has been
                    cured before the right is exercised.
                    (2) Quorum. In the events specified in subparagraph (1)(b) and/or subparagraph
                    (1)(c), any notice declaring Notes due shall, unless at the time such notice is received
                    any of the events specified in subparagraph (1)(a) and (1)(d) through (g) entitling
                    Holders to declare their Notes due has occurred, become effective only when the
                    Fiscal Agent has received such notices from the Holders of at least one-tenth in
                    aggregate principal amount of Notes then outstanding.
                    (3) Notice. Any notice, including any notice declaring Notes due, in accordance with
                    subparagraph (1) shall be made by means of a written declaration in the German or
                    English language delivered by hand or registered mail to the specified office of the
                    Fiscal Agent.]

In the case of      [(1) Events of default. Each Holder shall be entitled to declare his Notes due and
Notes issued by     demand immediate redemption thereof at their Final Redemption Amount plus
BASF Finance the
following applies
                    accrued interest (if any) to the date of repayment, in the event that

                    (a) the Issuer fails to pay principal or interest within 30 days from the relevant due
                        date, or
                    (b) the Issuer fails duly to perform any other obligation arising from the Notes or the
                        Guarantor fails to perform any obligation arising from the Guarantee and such
                        failure continues unremedied for more than 30 days after the Fiscal Agent has
                        received notice thereof from a Holder, or
                    (c) any Capital Market Indebtedness (as defined in § 2 subparagraph (2)) or a
                        certificate of indebtedness (with an initial maturity of more than one year) of the
                        Issuer or the Guarantor becomes prematurely repayable as a result of a default in
                        respect of the terms thereof, or the Issuer or the Guarantor fails to fulfil any
                        payment obligation in excess of EUR 200,000,000 or the equivalent thereof under
                        any Capital Market Indebtedness or under any certificate of indebtedness or under
                        any guarantees or suretyship given for any Capital Market Indebtedness or a
                        certificate of indebtedness of others within 30 days from its due date or, in the
                        case of a guarantee or suretyship, within 30 days of such guarantee or security
                        being invoked, unless the Issuer or the Guarantor shall contest in good faith that
                        such payment obligation exists or is due or that such guarantee or suretyship has
                        been validly invoked, or if a security granted in respect thereof is enforced on
                        behalf of or by the creditor(s) entitled thereto, or
                    (d) the Issuer or the Guarantor announces its inability to meet its financial obligations
                        generally or ceases its payments, or
                                                     83



                     (e) a court opens insolvency proceedings against the Issuer or the Guarantor; such
                         proceedings are instituted and have not been discharged or stayed within 60 days,
                         or the Issuer or the Guarantor applies for or institutes such proceedings or the
                         Issuer applies for a "surseance van betaling" (within the meaning of The
                         Bankruptcy Act of The Netherlands), or
                     (f) the Issuer or the Guarantor ceases all or substantially all of its business operations
                         or sells or disposes of its assets or the substantial part thereof and thus (i)
                         diminishes considerably the value of its assets and (ii) for this reason it becomes
                         likely that the Issuer or the Guarantor may not fulfil its payment obligations against
                         the Holders, or
                     (g) the Issuer or the Guarantor goes into liquidation unless this is done in connection
                         with a merger or other form of combination with another company or in connection
                         with a reorganization and such other or new company assumes all obligations
                         contracted by the Issuer or the Guarantor, in connection with the Notes; or
                     (h) the Guarantee ceases to be valid and legally binding for any reason whatsoever.
                     The right to declare Notes due shall terminate if the situation giving rise to it has been
                     cured before the right is exercised.
                     (2) Quorum. In the events specified in subparagraph (1)(b) and/or subparagraph
                     (1)(c), any notice declaring Notes due shall, unless at the time such notice is received
                     any of the events specified in subparagraph (1)(a) and (1)(d) through (h) entitling
                     Holders to declare their Notes due has occurred, become effective only when the
                     Fiscal Agent has received such notices from the Holders of at least one-tenth in
                     aggregate principal amount of Notes then outstanding.
                     (3) Notice. Any notice, including any notice declaring Notes due, in accordance with
                     subparagraph (1) shall be made by means of a written declaration in the German or
                     English language delivered by hand or registered mail to the specified office of the
                     Fiscal Agent.]

                                                              § 10
                                                          SUBSTITUTION
In the case of       [(1) Substitution. The Issuer may, without the consent of the Holders, if no payment of
Notes issued by      principal of or interest on any of the Notes is in default, at any time substitute for the
BASF the following
applies
                     Issuer any Affiliate (as defined below) of the Issuer as principal debtor in respect of all
                     obligations arising from or in connection with this issue (the "Substitute Debtor")
                     provided that:]

In the case of       [(1) Substitution. The Issuer may, without the consent of the Holders, if no payment of
Notes issued by      principal of or interest on any of the Notes is in default, at any time substitute for the
BASF Finance the
following applies
                     Issuer either the Guarantor or any Affiliate (as defined below) of the Guarantor as
                     principal debtor in respect of all obligations arising from or in connection with this
                     issue (the "Substitute Debtor") provided that:]
                     (a) the Substitute Debtor assumes all obligations of the Issuer in respect of the Notes;
                     (b) the Substitute Debtor has obtained all necessary authorizations and may transfer
                         to the Fiscal Agent in the currency required and without being obligated to deduct
                         or withhold any taxes or other duties of whatever nature levied by the country in
                         which the Substitute Debtor or the Issuer has its domicile or tax residence, all
                         amounts required for the fulfilment of the payment obligations arising under the
                         Notes;
                     (c) the Substitute Debtor has agreed to indemnify and hold harmless each Holder
                         against any tax, duty, assessment or governmental charge imposed on such
                         Holder in respect of such substitution;
In the case of       [(d) it is guaranteed that the obligations of the Issuer from the Guarantee and the
Notes issued by          Negative Pledge of the Debt Issuance Program of the Issuer (of which the
BASF the following
applies
                         provisions set out below in § 11 applicable to the Notes shall apply mutatis
                         mutandis) apply also to the Notes of the Substitute Debtor; and]
                                                   84



In the case of      [(d) it is guaranteed that the obligations of the Guarantor from the Guarantee and the
Notes issued by         Negative Pledge of the Debt Issuance Program of the Issuer apply also to the
BASF Finance the
following applies
                        Notes of the Substitute Debtor; and]

                    (e) there shall have been delivered to the Fiscal Agent for each jurisdiction affected
                        one opinion of lawyers of recognized standing to the effect that subparagraphs (a),
                        (b), (c) and (d) above have been satisfied.
                    For purposes of this § 10, "Affiliate" shall mean any affiliated company (verbundenes
                    Unternehmen) within the meaning of § 15 German Stock Corporation Act
                    (Aktiengesetz).
                    (2) Notice. Notice of any such substitution shall be published in accordance with § 13.
                    (3) Authorisation of the Issuer. In the event of such substitution, the Issuer is
                    authorised to modify the Global Note representing the Notes and these Terms and
                    Conditions without the consent of the Holders to the extent necessary to reflect the
                    changes resulting from the substitution. An appropriately adjusted global note
                    representing the Notes and Terms and Conditions will be deposited with the Clearing
                    System.

                                                    § 11
                              AMENDMENT OF THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, HOLDERS'
                               REPRESENTATIVE[, AMENDMENT OF THE GUARANTEE]
                    (1) Amendment of the Terms and Conditions. In accordance with the German Act on
                    Debt Securities of 2009, as amended (Schuldverschreibungsgesetz aus
                    Gesamtemissionen – "SchVG") the Holders may agree with the Issuer on
                    amendments of the Terms and Conditions with regard to matters permitted by the
                    SchVG by resolution with the majority specified in subparagraph (2). Majority
                    resolutions shall be binding on all Holders. Resolutions which do not provide for
                    identical conditions for all Holders are void, unless Holders who are disadvantaged
                    have expressly consented to their being treated disadvantageously.
                    (2) Majority. Resolutions shall be passed by a majority of at least 75% of the votes
                    cast. Resolutions relating to amendments of the Terms and Conditions which are not
                    material and which do not relate to the matters listed in § 5 paragraph 3, Nos. 1 to 8 of
                    the SchVG require a simple majority of the votes cast.
                    (3) Resolution of Holders. Resolutions of Holders shall be passed at the election of
                    the Issuer by vote taken without a meeting in accordance with § 18 and §§ 5 et seq.
                    SchVG or in a Holder's meeting in accordance with §§ 9 et seqq. of the SchVG.
                    (4) Chair of the vote taken without a meeting. The vote will be chaired by a notary
                    appointed by the Issuer or, if the Holders' Representative (as defined below) has
                    convened the vote, by the Holders' Representative.
                    (5) Voting rights. Each Holder participating in any vote shall cast votes in accordance
                    with the nominal amount or the notional share of its entitlement to the outstanding
                    Notes.
                    (6) Holders' Representative.
If no Holders'      [The Holders may by majority resolution appoint a common representative (the
Representative is   "Holders' Representative") to exercise the Holders' rights on behalf of each Holder.]
designated in the
Conditions the
following applies


If the Holders'     [The common representative (the "Holders' Representative") shall be [Holder's
Representative is   Representative]. The liability of the Holders' Representative shall be limited to ten
appointed in the
Conditions the
                    times the amount of its annual remuneration, unless the Holders' Representative has
following applies   acted willfully or with gross negligence.]

                    The Holders' Representative shall have the duties and powers provided by law or
                    granted by majority resolution of the Holders. The Holders' Representative shall
                    comply with the instructions of the Holders. To the extent that the Holders'
                    Representative has been authorized to assert certain rights of the Holders, the
                                  85


Holders shall not be entitled to assert such rights themselves, unless explicitly
provided for in the relevant majority resolution. The Holders' Representative shall
provide reports to the Holders on its activities. The regulations of the SchVG apply
with regard to the recall and the other rights and obligations of the Holders'
Representative.
(7) Procedural Provisions regarding Resolutions of Holders in a Holder's meeting.
(a) Notice Period, Registration, Proof.
(i)     A Holders' Meeting shall be convened not less than 14 days before the date of
        the meeting.
(ii)    If the Convening Notice provide(s) that attendance at a Holders' Meeting or the
        exercise of the voting rights shall be dependent upon a registration of the
        Holders before the meeting, then for purposes of calculating the period pursuant
        to subsection (1) the date of the meeting shall be replaced by the date by which
        the Holders are required to register. The registration notice must be received at
        the address set forth in the Convening Notice no later than on the third day
        before the Holders' Meeting.
(iii)   The Convening Notice may provide what proof is required to be entitled to take
        part in the Holders' Meeting. Unless otherwise provided in the Convening
        Notice, for Notes represented by a Global Note a voting certificate obtained from
        an agent to be appointed by the Issuer shall entitle its bearer to attend and vote
        at the Holders' Meeting. A voting certificate may be obtained by a Holder if at
        least six days before the time fixed for the Holders' Meeting, such Holder (a)
        deposits its Notes for such purpose with an agent to be appointed by the Issuer
        or to the order of such agent or (b) blocks its Notes in an account with a
        Custodian in accordance with the procedures of the Custodian and delivers a
        confirmation stating the ownership and blocking of its Notes to the agent of the
        Issuer. The Convening Notice may also require a proof of identity of a person
        exercising a voting right.
(b) Contents of the Convening Notice, Publication.
(i)     The Convening Notice (the "Convening Notice") shall state the name, the
        place of the registered office of the Issuer, the time and venue of the Holders'
        Meeting, and the conditions on which attendance in the Holders' Meeting and
        the exercise of voting rights is made dependent, including the matters referred
        to in subsection (a)(ii) and (iii).
(ii)    The Convening Notice shall be published promptly in the Federal Gazette
        (Bundesanzeiger) and additionally in accordance with the provisions of § 13.
        The costs of publication shall be borne by the Issuer.
(iii)   From the date on which the Holders' Meeting is convened until the date of the
        Holders' Meeting, the Issuer shall make available to the Holders, on the Issuer's
        website the Convening Notice and the precise conditions on which the
        attendance of the Holders' Meeting and the exercise of voting rights shall be
        dependent.
(c) Information Duties, Voting.
(i)     The Issuer shall be obliged to give information at the Holders' Meeting to each
        Holder upon request in so far as such information is required for an informed
        judgment regarding an item on the agenda or a proposed resolution.
(ii)    The provisions of the German Stock Corporation Act (Aktiengesetz) regarding
        the voting of shareholders at general meetings shall apply mutatis mutandis to
        the casting and counting of votes, unless otherwise provided for in the
        Convening Notice.
(d) Publication of Resolutions.
(i)     The Issuer shall at its expense cause publication of the resolutions passed in
        appropriate form. If the registered office of the Issuer is located in Germany, the
        resolutions shall promptly be published in the Federal Gazette
        (Bundesanzeiger) and additionally in accordance with the provisions of § 13.
        The publication prescribed in § 50(1) of the German Securities Trading Act
                                                       86


                              (Wertpapierhandelsgesetz) shall be sufficient.
                       (ii)   In addition, the Issuer shall make available to the public the resolutions passed
                              and, if the resolutions amend the Terms and Conditions, the wording of the
                              original Terms and Conditions, for a period of not less than one month
                              commencing on the day following the date of the Holders' Meeting. Such
                              publication shall be made on the Issuer's website.
                       (e) Taking of Votes without Meeting.
                       The call for the taking of votes shall specify the period within which votes may be cast.
                       Such period shall not be less than 72 hours. During such period, the Holders may cast
                       their votes in text format (Textform) to the person presiding over the taking of votes.
                       The Convening Notice may provide for other forms of casting votes. The call for the
                       taking of votes shall give details as to the prerequisites which must be met for the
                       votes to qualify for being counted.
In the case of         [(8) Amendment of the Guarantee. The provisions set out above applicable to the
Notes issued by        Notes shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Guarantee of BASF.]
BASF Finance the
following applies


                                                         § 12
                                     FURTHER ISSUES, PURCHASES AND CANCELLATION
                       (1) Further Issues. The Issuer may from time to time, without the consent of the
                       Holders, issue further Notes having the same terms and conditions as the Notes in all
                       respects (or in all respects except for the issue date, interest commencement date
                       and/or issue price) so as to form a single Series with the Notes.
                       (2) Purchases. The Issuer may at any time purchase Notes in the open market or
                       otherwise and at any price. Notes purchased by the Issuer may, at the option of the
                       Issuer, be held, resold or surrendered to the Fiscal Agent for cancellation. If
                       purchases are made by tender, tenders for such Notes must be made available to all
                       Holders of such Notes alike.
                       (3) Cancellation. All Notes redeemed in full shall be cancelled forthwith and may not
                       be reissued or resold.

                                                                § 13
                                                              NOTICES
In the case of         [(1) Publication. All notices concerning the Notes will be made by means of electronic
Notes which are        publication on the internet website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
listed on the
official list of the
                       (www.bourse.lu). Any notice so given will be deemed to have been validly given on
Luxembourg Stock       the third day following the date of such publication.
Exchange the
following applies

                       (2) Notification to Clearing System. So long as any Notes are listed on the
                       Luxembourg Stock Exchange, subparagraph (1) shall apply. If the Rules of the
                       Luxembourg Stock Exchange so permit, the Issuer may deliver the relevant notice to
                       the Clearing System for communication by the Clearing System to the Holders, in lieu
                       of publication as set forth in subparagraph (1) above; any such notice shall be
                       deemed to have been validly given on the seventh day after the day on which the said
                       notice was given to the Clearing System.]

In case of Notes       [(1) Notification to Clearing System. The Issuer shall deliver all notices concerning the
which are unlisted     Notes to the Clearing System for communication by the Clearing System to the
the following
applies
                       Holders. Any such notice shall be deemed to have been validly given on the seventh
                       day after the day on which the said notice was given to the Clearing System.]

                       [(3)] Form of Notice. Notices to be given by any Holder shall be made by means of a
                       declaration in text format (Textform, e.g. email or fax) or in written form sent together
                       with an evidence of the Holder's entitlement in accordance with § 14[(4)] to the Fiscal
                       Agent. Such notice may be given through the Clearing System in such manner as the
                       Fiscal Agent and the Clearing System may approve for such purpose.
                                                       87




                                                       § 14
                             APPLICABLE LAW, PLACE OF JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT
                       (1) Applicable Law. The Notes, as to form and content, and all rights and obligations
                       of the Holders and the Issuer, shall be governed by German law.
                       (2) Submission to Jurisdiction. The District Court (Landgericht) in Frankfurt am Main,
                       Federal Republic of Germany shall have non-exclusive jurisdiction for any action or
                       other legal proceedings ("Proceedings") arising out of or in connection with the
                       Notes.
In the case of         [(3) Appointment of Authorized Agent. For any Proceedings before German courts,
Notes issued by        the Issuer appoints BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein,
BASF Finance the
following applies
                       Federal Republic of Germany as its authorized agent for service of process in the
                       Federal Republic of Germany.]
                       [(4)] Enforcement. Any Holder of Notes may in any Proceedings against the Issuer,
                       or to which such Holder and the Issuer are parties, protect and enforce in his own
                       name his rights arising under such Notes on the basis of (i) a statement issued by the
                       Custodian with whom such Holder maintains a securities account in respect of the
                       Notes (a) stating the full name and address of the Holder, (b) specifying the
                       aggregate principal amount of Notes credited to such securities account on the date
                       of such statement and (c) confirming that the Custodian has given written notice to
                       the Clearing System containing the information pursuant to (a) and (b) and (ii) a copy
                       of the Note in global form certified as being a true copy by a duly authorized officer of
                       the Clearing System or a depository of the Clearing System, without the need for
                       production in such Proceedings of the actual records or the global note representing
                       the Notes. For purposes of the foregoing, "Custodian" means any bank or other
                       financial institution of recognized standing authorized to engage in securities custody
                       business with which the Holder maintains a securities account in respect of the Notes
                       and includes the Clearing System. Each Holder may, without prejudice to the
                       foregoing, protect and enforce his rights under these Notes also in any other way
                       which is admitted in the country of the Proceedings.

                                                               § 15
                                                            LANGUAGE
If the Terms and       [These Terms and Conditions are written in the German language and provided with
Conditions shall be    an English language translation. The German text shall be controlling and binding.
in the German
language with an
                       The English language translation is provided for convenience only.]
English language
translation the
following applies


If the Terms and       [These Terms and Conditions are written in the English language and provided with a
Conditions shall be    German language translation. The English text shall be controlling and binding. The
in the English lang-
uage with a
                       German language translation is provided for convenience only.]
German language
translation the
following applies


If the Terms and       [These Terms and Conditions are written in the English language only.]
Conditions shall be
in the English
language only the
following applies
                                                  88



In the case of         [Eine deutsche Übersetzung der Anleihebedingungen wird bei der BASF SE, Carl-
Notes that are         Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Bundesrepublik Deutschland, zur
publicly offered, in
whole or in part, in
                       kostenlosen Ausgabe bereitgehalten.]
Germany or
distributed, in
whole or in part, to
non-qualified
investors in
Germany with
English language
Terms and
Conditions the
following applies
                                                    89




                     OPTION II – Terms and Conditions that apply to Notes with floating interest rates


                                         TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES
                                             ENGLISH LANGUAGE VERSION

                                                     §1
                               CURRENCY, DENOMINATION, FORM, CERTAIN DEFINITIONS
                     (1) Currency; Denomination. This Series of Notes (the "Notes") of [BASF SE] [BASF
                     Finance Europe N.V.] (["BASF"]["BASF Finance"] or the "Issuer") is being issued in
                     [Specified Currency] (the "Specified Currency") in the aggregate principal amount
                     [in the case the global note is an NGN the following applies: , subject to § 1(4),] of
                     [aggregate principal amount] (in words: [aggregate principal amount in words]) in
                     the denomination of [specified denomination] (the "Specified Denomination").
                     (2) Form. The Notes are being issued in bearer form.
In the case of       [(3) Permanent Global Note. The Notes are represented by a permanent global note
Notes which are      (the "Permanent Global Note") without coupons. The Permanent Global Note shall be
represented
by a Permanent
                     signed by authorized signatories of the Issuer and shall be authenticated by or on
Global Note the      behalf of the Fiscal Agent. Definitive Notes and interest coupons will not be issued.]
following applies


In the case of       [(3) Temporary Global Note – Exchange.
Notes which are
initially            (a) The Notes are initially represented by a temporary global note (the "Temporary
represented by a         Global Note") without coupons. The Temporary Global Note will be exchangeable
Temporary Global         for Notes in the Specified Denomination represented by a permanent global note
Note the following
applies
                         (the "Permanent Global Note") without coupons. The Temporary Global Note and
                         the Permanent Global Note shall each be signed by authorized signatories of the
                         Issuer and shall each be authenticated by or on behalf of the Fiscal Agent.
                         Definitive Notes and interest coupons will not be issued.
                     (b) The Temporary Global Note shall be exchangeable for the Permanent Global Note
                         from a date 40 days after the date of issue of the Notes represented by the
                         Temporary Global Note. Such exchange shall only be made upon delivery of
                         certifications to the effect that the beneficial owner or owners of the Notes
                         represented by the Temporary Global Note is not a U.S. person (other than certain
                         financial institutions or certain persons holding Notes through such financial
                         institutions) as required by U.S. tax law. Payment of interest on Notes represented
                         by a Temporary Global Note will be made only after delivery of such certifications.
                         A separate certification shall be required in respect of each such payment of
                         interest. Any such certification received on or after the 40th day after the date of
                         issue of the Notes represented by the Temporary Global Note will be treated as a
                         request to exchange such Temporary Global Note pursuant to this subparagraph
                         (b) of this § 1(3). Any securities delivered in exchange for the Temporary Global
                         Note shall be delivered only outside of the United States (as defined in § 6(2)).]
                     (4) Clearing System. The global note representing the Notes will be kept in custody by
                     or on behalf of the Clearing System "Clearing System" means [If more than one
                     Clearing System the following applies: each of] the following: [Clearstream Banking
                     AG, Neue Börsenstr. 1, 60487 Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany,
                     ("CBF")] [Clearstream Banking S.A., 42 Avenue JF Kennedy, 1855 Luxembourg,
                     Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, ("CBL") and Euroclear Bank SA/NV, Boulevard du Roi
                     Albert II, 1210 Brussels, Belgium, ("Euroclear") (CBL and Euroclear each an "ICSD"
                     and together the "ICSDs")] and any successor in such capacity.
In the case of       [The Notes are issued in new global note ("NGN") form and are kept in custody by a
Notes kept in        common safekeeper on behalf of both ICSDs.
custody on behalf
of the ICSDs and     The aggregate principal amount of Notes represented by the global note shall be the
the global note is   aggregate amount from time to time entered in the records of both ICSDs. The records
an NGN the           of the ICSDs (which expression means the records that each ICSD holds for its
following applies    customers which reflect the amount of such customer's interest in the Notes) shall be
                                                      90


                       conclusive evidence of the aggregate principal amount of Notes represented by the
                       global note and, for these purposes, a statement issued by a ICSD stating the amount
                       of Notes so represented at any time shall be conclusive evidence of the records of the
                       relevant ICSD at that time.
                       On any redemption or payment of interest being made in respect of, or purchase and
                       cancellation of, any of the Notes represented by the global note the Issuer shall
                       procure that details of any redemption, payment or purchase and cancellation (as the
                       case may be) in respect of the global note shall be entered accordingly in the records
                       of the ICSDs and, upon any such entry being made, the aggregate principal amount of
                       the Notes recorded in the records of the ICSDs and represented by the global note
                       shall be reduced by the aggregate principal amount of the Notes so redeemed or
                       purchased and cancelled.
                       [In the case the Temporary Global Note is an NGN the following applies: On an
                       exchange of a portion only of the Notes represented by a Temporary Global Note, the
                       Issuer shall procure that details of such exchange shall be entered accordingly in the
                       records of the ICSDs.]]

In the case of         [The Notes are issued in classical global note ("CGN") form and are kept in custody by
Notes kept in          a common depositary on behalf of both ICSDs.]
custody on behalf
of the ICSDs and
the global note is a
CGN the following
applies

                       (5) Holder of Notes. "Holder" means any holder of a proportionate co-ownership or
                       other beneficial interest or right in the Notes.



                                                      §2
                        STATUS, NEGATIVE PLEDGE OF THE ISSUER[, GUARANTEE AND NEGATIVE
                                           PLEDGE OF THE GUARANTOR]
                       (1) Status. The obligations under the Notes constitute unsecured and unsubordinated
                       obligations of the Issuer ranking pari passu among themselves and pari passu with all
                       other unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Issuer, unless such obligations
                       are accorded priority under mandatory provisions of statutory law.
                       (2) Negative Pledge. The Issuer undertakes, as long as any Notes are outstanding, but
                       only up to the time all amounts of principal and interest have been placed at the
                       disposal of the Fiscal Agent, not to provide security upon any of its assets for any
                       present or future Capital Market Indebtedness or any guarantees or other indemnities
                       resulting therefrom, without at the same time having the Holders share equally and
                       rateably in such security or such other security as shall be approved by an
                       independent accounting firm of internationally recognized standing as being equivalent
                       security.
                       "Capital Market Indebtedness" means any obligation for the repayment of borrowed
                       money which is in the form of, or represented or evidenced by, bonds, notes or other
                       securities, with an original maturity of more than one year, which are, or are capable of
                       being, quoted, listed, dealt in or traded on a stock exchange or other recognized
                       securities market.
In the case of         [(3) Guarantee and Negative Pledge of the Guarantor. BASF (the "Guarantor") has
Notes issued by        given its unconditional and irrevocable guarantee (the "Guarantee") for the due and
BASF Finance the
following applies
                       punctual payment of principal of, and interest on, and any other amounts payable
                       under any Note. The Guarantor has further undertaken in a negative pledge (the
                       "Negative Pledge"), so long as any of the Notes are outstanding, but only up to the
                       time all amounts of principal and interest have been placed at the disposal of the
                       Fiscal Agent, not to provide security upon any of its assets for any present or future
                       Capital Market Indebtedness (as defined above) or any guarantees or other
                       indemnities resulting therefrom, without at the same time having the Holders share
                       equally and ratably in such security as shall be approved by an independent
                       accounting firm of internationally recognized standing as being equivalent security.
                                                    91


                      The Guarantee and Negative Pledge constitute a contract for the benefit of the Holders
                      from time to time as third party beneficiaries in accordance with § 328 German Civil
                      Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BGB), giving rise to the right of each Holder to
                      require performance of the Guarantee and the Negative Pledge directly from the
                      Guarantor and to enforce the Guarantee and the Negative Pledge directly against the
                      Guarantor.]

                                                              §3
                                                           INTEREST
                      (1) Interest Payment Dates.
                      (a) The Notes bear interest on their aggregate principal amount from (and including)
                          [Interest Commencement Date] (the "Interest Commencement Date") to (but
                          excluding) the first Interest Payment Date and thereafter from (and including) each
                          Interest Payment Date to (but excluding) the next following Interest Payment Date.
                          Interest on the Notes shall be payable on each Interest Payment Date.
                      (b) "Interest Payment Date" means
In the case of           [each [Specified Interest Payment Dates].]
Specified Interest
Payment Dates the
following applies


In the case of           [each date which (except as otherwise provided in these Terms and Conditions)
Specified Interest       falls [number] [weeks] [months] after the preceding Interest Payment Date or, in
Periods the
following applies
                         the case of the first Interest Payment Date, after the Interest Commencement
                         Date.]
                      (c) If any Interest Payment Date would otherwise fall on a day which is not a Business
                          Day (as defined below), it shall be
In the case of the       [postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would thereby fall into
Modified Following       the next calendar month, in which event the Interest Payment Date shall be the
Business Day
Convention the
                         immediately preceding Business Day.]
following applies


In the case of the       [postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would thereby fall into
FRN Convention           the next calendar month, in which event (i) the Interest Payment Date shall be the
the following
applies
                         immediately preceding Business Day and (ii) each subsequent Interest Payment
                         Date shall be the last Business Day in the month which falls [number] months after
                         the preceding applicable Interest Payment Date.]

In the case of the       [postponed to the next day which is a Business Day.]
Following
Business Day
Convention the
following applies

                      (d) "Business Day" means
In the case the          [a day which is a day (other than a Saturday or a Sunday) on which commercial
Specified Currency       banks are generally open for business in, and foreign exchange markets settle
is not EUR, the
following applies
                         payments in [relevant financial centre(s)]and on which the Clearing System is
                         open to effect payments.]

In the case the          [a day (other than a Staurday or a Sunday) on which the Clearing System as well
Specified Currency       as all relevant parts of the Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross Settlement
is EUR, the
following applies
                         Express Transfer System 2 ("TARGET") are open to effect payments.]


In the case the       [(2) Rate of Interest. The rate of interest (the "Rate of Interest") for each Interest
offered quotation     Period (as defined below) will, except as provided below, be determined by the
for deposits in the
Specified Currency
                      Calculation Agent and is the Reference Rate (as defined below) [[plus] [minus] the
is EURIBOR the        Margin (as defined below)]. The applicable Reference Rate shall be the rate which
                                                   92


following applies   appears on the Screen Page as of 11:00 a. m. (Brussels time) on the Interest
                    Determination Date (as defined below).
                    The "Reference Rate" is the offered quotation (expressed as a percentage rate per
                    annum) for deposits in the Specified Currency for that Interest Period (EURIBOR).
                    "Interest Period" means each period from (and including) the Interest
                    Commencement Date to (but excluding) the first Interest Payment Date and from each
                    Interest Payment Date (and including) to the following Interest Payment Date (but
                    excluding).
                    "Interest Determination Date" means the [first] [second] TARGET Business Day
                    [prior to the commencement] of the relevant Interest Period. "TARGET Business
                    Day" means a day on which all relevant parts of TARGET (Trans-European Automated
                    Real-time Gross Settlement Express Transfer System 2) are open to effect payments.
                    ["Margin" means [●] % per annum.]
                    "Screen Page" means Reuters screen page EURIBOR01 or the relevant successor
                    page on that service or on any other service as may be nominated as the information
                    vendor for the purposes of displaying rates or prices comparable to the relevant
                    offered quotation.
                    If the Screen Page is not available or if no such quotation appears, in each case as at
                    such time on the relevant Interest Determination Date, the Rate of Interest on the
                    Interest Determination Date shall be equal to the Rate of Interest as displayed on the
                    Screen Page on the last day preceding the Interest Determination Date on which such
                    Rate of Interest was displayed on the Screen Page [[plus] [minus] the Margin (as
                    defined above)], all as determined by the Calculation Agent.
                    "Euro-Zone" means the region comprised of those member states of the European
                    Union that have adopted, or will have adopted from time to time, the single currency in
                    accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community (signed in Rome on
                    March 25, 1957), as amended by the Treaty on European Union (signed in Maastricht
                    on February 7, 1992), the Amsterdam Treaty of October 2, 1997 and the Treaty of
                    Lisbon of December 13, 2007, as further amended from time to time.
                    "representative amount" means an amount that is representative for a single trans-
                    action in the relevant market at the relevant time.
                    As used herein, "Reference Banks" means four major banks in the interbank market
                    in the Euro-Zone.]

                    (3) Interest Amount. The Calculation Agent will, on or as soon as practicable after each
                    time at which the Rate of Interest is to be determined, calculate the amount of interest
                    (the "Interest Amount") payable on the Notes in respect of the Specified
                    Denomination for the relevant Interest Period. Each Interest Amount shall be
                    calculated by applying the Rate of Interest and the Day Count Fraction (as defined
                    below) to the Specified Denomination and rounding the resultant figure to the nearest
                    unit of the Specified Currency, with 0.5 of such unit being rounded upwards.
                    (4) Notification of Rate of Interest and Interest Amount. The Calculation Agent will
                    cause the Rate of Interest, each Interest Amount for each Interest Period, each
                    Interest Period and the relevant Interest Payment Date to be notified to the Issuer [in
                    the case of Notes issued by BASF Finance the following applies: and the
                    Guarantor] and to the Holders in accordance with § 13 as soon as possible after their
                    determination, but in no event later than the fourth [TARGET] [relevant financial
                    centre(s)] Business Day (as defined in § 3(2)) thereafter and if required by the rules of
                    any stock exchange on which the Notes are listed from time to time, to such stock
                    exchange as soon as possible after their determination, but in no event later than the
                    first day of the relevant Interest Period. Each Interest Amount and Interest Payment
                    Date so notified may subsequently be amended (or appropriate alternative
                    arrangements may be made by way of adjustment) without notice in the event of an
                    extension or shortening of the Interest Period. Any such amendment will be promptly
                    notified to any stock exchange on which the Notes are then listed, if the rules of such
                    stock exchange so require, and to the Holders in accordance with § 13.
                    (5) Determinations Binding. All certificates, communications, opinions, determinations,
                                                             93


                         calculations, quotations and decisions given, expressed, made or obtained for the
                         purposes of the provisions of this § 3 by the Calculation Agent shall (in the absence of
                         manifest error) be binding on the Issuer, the Fiscal Agent, the Paying Agent and the
                         Holders.
                         (6) Accrual of Interest. If the Issuer fails to redeem the Notes when due, interest shall
                         continue to accrue beyond the due date until actual redemption of the Notes. The
                         applicable Rate of Interest will be the default rate of interest established by law.(1)
                         (7) Day Count Fraction. "Day Count Fraction" means with regard to the calculation of
                         interest on any Note for any period of time (the "Calculation Period"):
In the case of           [the actual number of days in the Calculation Period divided by 365.]
Actual/365 (Fixed)
the following
applies


In the case of           [the actual number of days in the Calculation Period divided by 360.]
Actual/360 the
following applies

                         (8)(a) Rate Replacement. If the Issuer determines (in consultation with the Calculation
                         Agent) that a Rate Replacement Event has occurred on or prior to an Interest
                         Determination Date, the Relevant Determining Party shall determine and duly inform
                         the Issuer, if relevant, and the Calculation Agent of (i) the Replacement Rate, (ii) the
                         Adjustment Spread, if any, and (iii) the Replacement Rate Adjustments (each as
                         defined below in § 3(8)(b)(aa) to (cc) and (hh)) for purposes of determining the Rate of
                         Interest for the Interest Period related to that Interest Determination Date and each
                         Interest Period thereafter (subject to the subsequent occurrence of any further Rate
                         Replacement Event). The Terms and Conditions shall be deemed to have been
                         amended by the Replacement Rate Adjustments with effect from (and including) the
                         relevant Interest Determination Date (including any amendment of such Interest
                         Determination Date if so provided by the Replacement Rate Adjustments). The Rate of
                         Interest shall then be the Replacement Rate (as defined below) adjusted by the
                         Adjustment Spread, if any, [[plus] [minus] the Margin (as defined above)].
                         The Issuer shall notify the Holders pursuant to § 13 as soon as practicable
                         (unverzüglich) after such determination of the Replacement Rate, the Adjustment
                         Spread, if any, and the Replacement Rate Adjustments. In addition, the Issuer shall
                         request the [Clearing System] [common depositary on behalf of both ICSDs] to
                         supplement the Terms and Conditions to reflect the Replacement Rate Adjustments by
                         attaching the documents submitted to it to the Global Note in an appropriate manner.
                         (b) Definitions.
                             (aa) "Rate Replacement Event" means, with respect to the Reference Rate, each
                                  of the following events:
                                   (i)    the Reference Rate not having been published on the Screen Page for
                                          ten (10) consecutive Business Days immediately prior to the relevant
                                          Interest Determination Date; or
                                   (ii)   the occurence of the date, as publicly announced by or, as the case may
                                          be, determinable based upon the public announcement of the competent
                                          authority of the administrator of the Reference Rate, from which the
                                          Reference Rate no longer reflects the underlying market or economic
                                          reality and no action to remediate such a situation is taken or expected to
                                          be taken by the competent authority for the administrator of the
                                          Reference Rate; or
                                   (iii) the occurrence of the date, as publicly announced by or, as the case may
                                         be, determinable based upon the public announcement of the
                                         administrator of the Reference Rate on which the administrator (x) will
                                         commence the orderly wind-down of the Reference Rate or (y) will cease
                                         to publish the Reference Rate permanently or indefinitely (in

(1)   The default rate of interest established by law is five percentage points above the basic rate of interest published by
      Deutsche Bundesbank from time to time; §§ 288 paragraph 1, 247 paragraph 1 German Civil Code (Bürgerliches
      Gesetzbuch, BGB).
                            94


            circumstances where no successor administrator has been appointed
            that will continue the publication of the Reference Rate); or
     (iv) the occurrence of the date, as publicly announced by the competent
          authority for the administrator of the Reference Rate, the central bank for
          the Specified Currency, an insolvency official with jurisdiction over the
          administrator for the Reference Rate, a resolution authority with
          jurisdiction over the administrator for the Reference Rate or a court
          (unappealable final decision) or an entity with similar insolvency or
          resolution authority over the administrator for the Reference Rate, on
          which the administrator of the Reference Rate (x) will commence the
          orderly wind-down of the Reference Rate or (y) has ceased or will cease
          to provide the Reference Rate permanently or indefinitely (in
          circumstances where no successor administrator has been appointed
          that will continue the publication of the Reference Rate); or
     (v)    the occurrence of the date, as publicly announced by or, as the case may
            be, determinable based upon the public announcement of the competent
            authority for the administrator of the Reference Rate, from which the
            Reference Rate will be prohibited from being used; or
     (vi) the occurrence of the date, as publicly announced by or, as the case may
          be, determinable based upon the public announcement of the
          administrator of the Reference Rate, of a material change in the
          methodology of determining the Reference Rate; or
     (vii) the publication of a notice by the Issuer pursuant to § 13(1) that it has
           become unlawful for the Issuer, the Calculation Agent or any Paying
           Agent to calculate any Rate of Interest using the Reference Rate; or
     (viiii)the European Commission or the competent national authority of a
             Member State have designated one or more replacement benchmarks
             for a Reference Rate pursuant to Art. 23b (2) and Art. 23c (1) of
             Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of June 8, 2016 on indices used as
             benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts or to
             measure the performance of investment funds.
(bb) "Replacement Rate" means a publicly available substitute, successor,
     alternative or other rate designed to be referenced by financial instruments or
     contracts, including the Notes, to determine an amount payable under such
     financial instruments or contracts, including, but not limited to, an amount of
     interest. In determining the Replacement Rate, the Relevant Guidance (as
     defined below) shall be taken into account.
(cc) "Adjustment Spread" means a spread (which may be positive or negative),
     or the formula or methodology for calculating a spread, which the Relevant
     Determining Party determines is required to be applied to the Replacement
     Rate to reduce or eliminate, to the extent reasonably practicable, any transfer
     of economic value between the Issuer and the Holders that would otherwise
     arise as a result of the replacement of the Reference Rate against the
     Replacement Rate (including, but not limited to, as a result of the
     Replacement Rate being a risk-free rate). In determining the Adjustment
     Spread, the Relevant Guidance (as defined below) shall be taken into
     account.
(dd) "Relevant Determining Party" means
     (i)    the Issuer if in its opinion the Replacement Rate is obvious and as such
            without any reasonable doubt determinable by an investor that is
            knowledgeable in the respective type of bonds, such as the Notes; or
     (ii)   failing which, an Independent Advisor (as defined below), to be
            appointed by the Issuer at commercially reasonable terms, using
            reasonable endeavours, as its agent to make such determinations.
(ee) "Independent Advisor" means an independent financial institution of
     international repute or any other independent advisor of recognised standing
     and with appropriate experience in the international debt capital markets.
                                                        95



                         (ff)   "Relevant Guidance" means (i) any legal or supervisory requirement
                                applicable to the Issuer or the Notes or, if none, (ii) any applicable
                                requirement, recommendation or guidance of a Relevant Nominating Body or,
                                if none, (iii) any relevant recommendation or guidance by industry bodies
                                (including by ISDA), or, if none, (iv) any relevant market practice.
                         (gg) "Relevant Nominating Body" means
                                (i)    the central bank for the Specified Currency, or any central bank or other
                                       supervisor which is responsible for supervising either the Replacement
                                       Rate or the administrator of the Replacement Rate; or
                                (ii)   the European Commission or any competent national authority of a
                                       Member State; or
                                (iii) any working group or committee officially endorsed, sponsored or
                                      convened by or chaired or co-chaired by (w) the central bank for the
                                      Specified Currency, (x) any central bank or other supervisor which is
                                      responsible for supervising either the Reference Rate or the
                                      administrator of the Reference Rate, (y) a group of the aforementioned
                                      central banks or other supervisors or (z) the Financial Stability Board or
                                      any part thereof.
                         (hh) "Replacement Rate Adjustments" means such adjustments to the Terms
                              and Conditions as are determined consequential to enable the operation of
                              the Replacement Rate (which may include, without limitation, adjustments to
                              the applicable Business Day Convention, the definition of Business Day, the
                              Interest Determination Date, the Day Count Fraction and any methodology or
                              definition for obtaining or calculating the Replacement Rate). In determining
                              any Replacement Rate Adjustments the Relevant Guidance shall be taken
                              into account.
                      (c) Termination. If a Replacement Rate, an Adjustment Spread, if any, or the
                          Replacement Rate Adjustments cannot be determined pursuant to § 3(8)(a) and
                          (b), the Reference Rate in respect of the relevant Interest Determination Date shall
                          be the Reference Rate determined for the last preceding Interest Period. The
                          Issuer will inform the Calculation Agent accordingly. As a result, the Issuer may,
                          upon not less than 15 days' notice given to the Holders in accordance with § 13,
                          redeem all, and not only some of the Notes at any time on any Business Day
                          before the respective subsequent Interest Determination Date at the Final
                          Redemption Amount together with accrued interest, if any, to (but excluding) the
                          respective redemption date.

                                                                 §4
                                                              PAYMENTS
                      (1) (a) Payment of Principal. Payment of principal in respect of Notes shall be made,
                      subject to subparagraph (2) below, to the Clearing System or to its order for credit to
                      the accounts of the relevant account holders of the Clearing System.
                      (b) Payment of Interest. Payment of interest on Notes shall be made, subject to sub-
                      paragraph (2), to the Clearing System or to its order for credit to the relevant account
                      holders of the Clearing System.
In the case of        [Payment of interest on Notes represented by the Temporary Global Note shall be
interest payable on   made, subject to subparagraph (2), to the Clearing System or to its order for credit to
a Temporary
Global Note the
                      the relevant account holders of the Clearing System, upon due certification as
following applies     provided in § 1(3)(b).]

                      (2) Manner of Payment. Subject to (i) applicable fiscal and other laws and regulations
                      and (ii) any withholding or deduction required pursuant to an agreement described in
                      Section 1471(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the "Code") or otherwise
                      imposed pursuant to Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code, any regulations or
                      agreements thereunder, any official interpretations thereof, or any law implementing an
                      intergovernmental approach thereto, payments of amounts due in respect of the Notes
                      shall be made in the Specified Currency.
                      (3) Discharge. The Issuer shall be discharged by payment to, or to the order of, the
                                                     96


                     Clearing System.
                     (4) Payment Business Day. If the date for payment of any amount in respect of any
                     Note is not a Payment Business Day then the Holder shall not be entitled to payment
                     until the next such day in the relevant place and shall not be entitled to further interest
                     or other payment in respect of such delay.
                     For these purposes, "Payment Business Day" means any day which is a Business
                     Day.
                     (5) References to Principal and Interest. References in these Terms and Conditions to
                     principal in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to include, as applicable: the Final
                     Redemption Amount of the Notes; and any premium and any other amounts which
                     may be payable under or in respect of the Notes. References in these Terms and
                     Conditions to interest in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to include, as
                     applicable, any Additional Amounts which may be payable under § 7.
                     (6) Deposit of Principal and Interest. The Issuer may deposit with the local court
                     (Amtsgericht) in Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany, principal or interest
                     not claimed by Holders within twelve months after the Maturity Date, even though such
                     Holders may not be in default of acceptance of payment. If and to the extent that the
                     deposit is effected and the right of withdrawal is waived, the respective claims of such
                     Holders against the Issuer shall cease.

                                                              §5
                                                          REDEMPTION
                     (1) Final Redemption. Unless previously redeemed in whole or in part or purchased
                     and cancelled, the Notes shall be redeemed at their Final Redemption Amount on the
                     Interest Payment Date falling in [Redemption Month] (the "Maturity Date"). The
                     "Final Redemption Amount" in respect of each Note shall be its principal amount.
In the case of       [(2) Early Redemption for Reasons of Taxation. If as a result of any change in, or
Notes issued by      amendment to, the laws or regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany or any
BASF the following
applies
                     political subdivision or taxing authority thereto or therein affecting taxation or the
                     obligation to pay duties of any kind, or any change in, or amendment to, an official
                     interpretation or application of such laws or regulations, which amendment or change
                     is effective on or after the date on which the last tranche of this series of Notes was
                     issued, the Issuer is required to pay Additional Amounts (as defined in § 7 herein) on
                     the next succeeding Interest Payment Date (as defined in § 3(1)), and this obligation
                     cannot be avoided by the use of reasonable measures available to the Issuer, the
                     Notes may be redeemed, in whole, but not in part, at the option of the Issuer, upon not
                     more than 60 days', but not less than 30 days' prior notice of redemption given to the
                     Fiscal Agent and, in accordance with § 13 to the Holders, at their Final Redemption
                     Amount, together with interest accrued to the date fixed for redemption.
                     However, no such notice of redemption may be given (i) earlier than 90 days prior to
                     the earliest date on which the Issuer would be obligated to pay such Additional
                     Amounts were a payment in respect of the Notes then due, or (ii) if at the time such
                     notice is given, such obligation to pay such Additional Amounts does not remain in
                     effect. The date fixed for redemption must be an Interest Payment Date.]

In the case of       [(2) Early Redemption for Reasons of Taxation. If as a result of any change in, or
Notes issued by      amendment to, the laws or regulations of the Federal Republic of Germany or The
BASF Finance the
following applies
                     Netherlands or any political subdivision or taxing authority thereto or therein affecting
                     taxation or the obligation to pay duties of any kind, or any change in, or amendment to,
                     an official interpretation or application of such laws or regulations, which amendment
                     or change is effective on or after the date on which the last tranche of this series of
                     Notes was issued, the Issuer or the Guarantor is required to pay Additional Amounts
                     (as defined in § 7 herein) on the next succeeding Interest Payment Date (as defined in
                     § 3(1)), and this obligation cannot be avoided by the use of reasonable measures
                     available to the Issuer or the Guarantor, as the case may be, the Notes may be
                     redeemed, in whole but not in part, at the option of the Issuer, upon not more than 60
                     days' nor less than 30 days' prior notice of redemption given to the Fiscal Agent and, in
                     accordance with § 13 to the Holders, at their Final Redemption Amount, together with
                     interest accrued to the date fixed for redemption.
                                                   97



                    However, no such notice of redemption may be given (i) earlier than 90 days prior to
                    the earliest date on which the Issuer or the Guarantor would be obligated to pay such
                    Additional Amounts were a payment in respect of the Notes then due, or (ii) if at the
                    time such notice is given, such obligation to pay such Additional Amounts does not
                    remain in effect. The date fixed for redemption must be an Interest Payment Date.]
                    Any such notice shall be given in accordance with § 13. It shall be irrevocable, must
                    specify the date fixed for redemption and must set forth a statement in summary form
                    of the facts constituting the basis for the right of the Issuer so to redeem.
If the Notes are    [(3) Change of Control. If there occurs a Change of Control and within the Change of
subject to Early    Control Period a Rating Downgrade in respect of that Change of Control occurs
Redemption for
Reasons of a
                    (together called a "Put Event"), each Holder will have the option (unless, prior to the
Change of Control   giving of the Put Event Notice referred to below, the Issuer gives notice to redeem the
the following       Notes in accordance with § 5(2)) to require the Issuer to redeem that Note on the
applies             Optional Redemption Date at its principal amount together with interest accrued to but
                    excluding the Optional Redemption Date.
                    For the purposes of such option:
                    "Rating Agency" means each of the rating agencies of S&P Global Ratings Europe
                    Limited ("S&P"), Moody's Deutschland GmbH ("Moody's") and Fitch Ratings Ireland
                    Limited ("Fitch") or any of their respective successors or any other rating agency of
                    equivalent international standing specified from time to time by BASF;
                    A "Rating Downgrade" shall be deemed to have occurred in respect of a Change of
                    Control if within the Change of Control Period any rating previously assigned to BASF
                    or the Notes by any Rating Agency is (i) withdrawn or (ii) changed from an investment
                    grade rating (BBB- by S&P/Baa3 by Moody's and Fitch, or its equivalent for the time
                    being, or better) to a non-investment grade rating (BB+ by S&P and Fitch/Ba1 by
                    Moody's, or its equivalent for the time being, or worse);
                    A "Change of Control" shall be deemed to have occurred at each time (whether or
                    not approved by the Board of Executive Directors or Supervisory Board of BASF) that
                    any person or persons ("Relevant Person(s)") acting in concert (as defined in § 30 (2)
                    of the German Securities Acquisition and Takeover Act (Wertpapiererwerbs- und
                    Übernahmegesetz)) or any person or persons acting on behalf of any such Relevant
                    Person(s), at any time directly or indirectly acquire(s) or come(s) to own such number
                    of the shares in the capital of BASF carrying more than 50% of the voting rights;
                    "Change of Control Period" means the period ending 120 days after the occurrence
                    of the Change of Control; and
                    The "Optional Redemption Date" is the fifteenth day after the last day of the Put
                    Period.
                    Promptly upon the Issuer becoming aware that a Put Event has occurred, the Issuer
                    shall give notice (a "Put Event Notice") to the Holders in accordance with § 13
                    specifying the nature of the Put Event and the circumstances giving rise to it and the
                    procedure for exercising the option set out in this § 5(3).
                    In order to exercise such option, the Holder must send to the specified office of the
                    Fiscal Agent an early redemption notice in text format (Textform, e.g. email or fax) or in
                    written form ("Put Notice") within the period of 45 days after a Put Event Notice (the
                    "Put Period") has been given. In the event that the Put Notice is received after 5:00
                    p.m. Frankfurt am Main time on the 45th after the Put Event Notice has been given,
                    the option shall not have been validly exercised. The Put Notice must specify (i) the
                    total principal amount of the Notes in respect of which such option is exercised and (ii)
                    the securities identification numbers of such Notes, if any. The Put Notice may be in
                    the form available from the specified offices of the Fiscal Agent in the German and
                    English language and includes further information. No option so exercised may be
                    revoked or withdrawn. The Issuer shall only be required to redeem Notes in respect of
                    which such option is exercised against delivery of such Notes to the Issuer or to its
                    order.]

If the Notes are    [[(4)] Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer.
subject to Early
                                                      98


Redemption at the
Option of the         (a) The Issuer may, upon notice given in accordance with clause (b), redeem all or
Issuer at Specified       some only of the Notes on the Interest Payment Date following [number] years after
Call Redemption           the Interest Commencement Date [in the case that the Notes may also be
Amounts the               redeemed on any Interest Payment Date thereafter, the following applies: and
following applies
                          on each Interest Payment Date thereafter] ([each a] [the] "Call Redemption Date")
                          at the [respective] Call Redemption Amount[s] set forth below together with accrued
                          interest, if any, to (but excluding) the respective Call Redemption Date.


                      [Call Redemption Date[s]]            [Call Redemption Amount [s]]


                      [                                ] [                                  ]
                      [                                ] [                                  ]
                      (b) Notice of redemption shall be given by the Issuer to the Holders of the Notes in
                          accordance with § 13. Such notice shall specify:
                          (i)   the Series of Notes subject to redemption;
                          (ii) whether such Series is to be redeemed in whole or in part only and, if in part
                               only, the aggregate principal amount of the Notes which are to be redeemed;
                               and
                          (iii) the Call Redemption Date, which shall be not less than 30 days nor more than
                                60 days after the date on which notice is given by the Issuer to the Holders.
                      (c) In the case of a partial redemption of Notes, Notes to be redeemed shall be
                          selected in accordance with the rules and procedures of the relevant Clearing
                          System. [In the case of Notes in NGN form the following applies: Such partial
                          redemption shall be reflected in the records of CBL and Euroclear as either a pool
                          factor or a reduction in aggregate principal amount, at the discretion of CBL and
                          Euroclear.]]

                                                            §6
                                            THE FISCAL AGENT, THE PAYING AGENT
                                                AND THE CALCULATION AGENT
                      (1) Appointment; Specified Office. The initial Fiscal Agent, the initial Paying Agent and
                      the initial Calculation Agent and their initial specified offices shall be:
                      Fiscal Agent              Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
                      and Paying Agent:         Trust & Agency Services
                                                Taunusanlage 12
                                                60325 Frankfurt am Main
                                                Federal Republic of Germany
                      Calculation Agent:        [name and specified office]
                      The Fiscal Agent, the Paying Agent and the Calculation Agent reserve the right at any
                      time to change their specified offices to some other specified office in the same
                      country.
                      (2) Variation or Termination of Appointment. The Issuer reserves the right at any time
                      to vary or terminate the appointment of the Fiscal Agent or any Paying Agent or the
                      Calculation Agent and to appoint another Fiscal Agent or additional or other Paying
                      Agents or another Calculation Agent. The Issuer shall at all times maintain [(i)] a
                      Fiscal Agent [in the case of payments in U.S. dollar the following applies:, (ii) if
                      payments at or through the offices of all Paying Agents outside the United States (as
                      defined below) become illegal or are effectively precluded because of the imposition of
                      exchange controls or similar restrictions on the full payment or receipt of such
                      amounts in U.S. dollar, a Paying Agent with a specified office in New York City] [and]
                      [(iii)] a Calculation Agent. Any variation, termination, appointment or change shall only
                      take effect (other than in the case of insolvency, when it shall be of immediate effect)
                      after not less than 30 days nor more than 45 days' prior notice thereof shall have been
                      given to the Holders in accordance with § 13. For purposes of these Terms and
                                                   99


                     Conditions, "United States" means the United States of America (including the States
                     thereof and the District of Columbia) and its possessions (including Puerto Rico, the
                     U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, Wake Island and Northern Mariana
                     Islands).
                     (3) Agent of the Issuer. The Fiscal Agent, the Paying Agent and the Calculation Agent
                     act solely as the agents of the Issuer and do not assume any obligations towards or
                     relationship of agency or trust for any Holder.

                                                              §7
                                                           TAXATION
In the case of       [All amounts payable in respect of the Notes shall be made without withholding or
Notes issued by      deduction for or on account of any present or future taxes or duties of whatever nature
BASF the following
applies
                     imposed or levied by way of withholding or deduction by or on behalf of the Federal
                     Republic of Germany or any political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein
                     having power to tax unless such withholding or deduction is required by law. If such
                     withholding is required by law, the Issuer will pay such additional amounts (the
                     "Additional Amounts") as shall be necessary in order that the net amounts received
                     by the Holders, after such withholding or deduction shall equal the respective amounts
                     which would otherwise have been receivable in the absence of such withholding or
                     deduction; except that no such Additional Amounts shall be payable on account of any
                     taxes or duties which:
                     (a) are payable by any person acting as custodian bank or collecting agent on behalf
                         of a Holder, or otherwise in any manner which does not constitute a deduction or
                         withholding by the Issuer from payments of principal or interest made by it, or
                     (b) are payable by reason of the Holder having, or having had, some personal or
                         business connection with the Federal Republic of Germany and not merely by
                         reason of the fact that payments in respect of the Notes are, or for purposes of
                         taxation are deemed to be, derived from sources in, or are secured in, the Federal
                         Republic of Germany, or
                     (c) are deducted or withheld pursuant to (i) any European Union Directive or
                         Regulation concerning the taxation of interest income, or (ii) any international
                         treaty or understanding relating to such taxation and to which the Federal Republic
                         of Germany or the European Union is a party, or (iii) any provision of law
                         implementing, or complying with, or introduced to conform with, such Directive,
                         Regulation, treaty or understanding, or
                     (d) are payable by reason of a change in law that becomes effective more than
                         30 days after the relevant payment becomes due, or is duly provided for and notice
                         thereof is published in accordance with § 13, whichever occurs later; or
                     (e) are payable by reason of the Holder residing in a non-cooperative state or territory
                         as defined in the German Defense Against Tax Haven Act (Gesetz zur Abwehr von
                         Steuervermeidung und unfairem Steuerwettbewerb – Steueroasen-Abwehrgesetz)
                         of June 25, 2021, as amended or replaced from time to time (including any
                         ordinance enacted based on this law).
                     The flat tax (Abgeltungssteuer) which has been in effect in the Federal Republic of
                     Germany since January 1, 2009 and the solidarity surcharge (Solidaritätszuschlag)
                     imposed thereon do not constitute a tax as described above in respect of which
                     Additional Amounts would be payable by the Issuer.]

In the case of       [All amounts payable in respect of the Notes or under the Guarantee shall be made
Notes issued by      without withholding or deduction for or on account of any present or future taxes or
BASF Finance the
following applies
                     duties of whatever nature imposed or levied by way of withholding or deduction by or
                     on behalf of The Netherlands or the Federal Republic of Germany or any political
                     subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax unless such
                     withholding or deduction is required by law. If such withholding is required by law, the
                     Issuer will pay such additional amounts (the "Additional Amounts") as shall be
                     necessary in order that the net amounts received by the Holders, after such
                     withholding or deduction shall equal the respective amounts which would otherwise
                     have been receivable in the absence of such withholding or deduction; except that no
                                                   100


                     such Additional Amounts shall be payable on account of any taxes or duties which:
                     (a) are payable by any person acting as custodian bank or collecting agent on behalf
                         of a Holder, or otherwise in any manner which does not constitute a deduction or
                         withholding by the Issuer from payments of principal or interest made by it, or
                     (b) are payable by reason of the Holder having, or having had, some personal or
                         business connection with The Netherlands or the Federal Republic of Germany
                         and not merely by reason of the fact that payments in respect of the Notes are, or
                         for purposes of taxation are deemed to be, derived from sources in, are deducted
                         or withheld pursuant to the application of the Dutch Withholding Tax Act 2021 (Wet
                         bronbelasting 2021), or are secured in, The Netherlands or the Federal Republic of
                         Germany, or
                     (c) are deducted or withheld pursuant to (i) any European Union Directive or
                         Regulation concerning the taxation of interest income, or (ii) any international
                         treaty or understanding relating to such taxation and to which the Federal Republic
                         of Germany or The Netherlands or the European Union is a party, or (iii) any
                         provision of law implementing, or complying with, or introduced to conform with,
                         such Directive, Regulation, treaty or understanding, or
                     (d) are payable by reason of a change in law that becomes effective more than
                         30 days after the relevant payment becomes due, or is duly provided for and notice
                         thereof is published in accordance with § 13, whichever occurs later.


                     The flat tax (Abgeltungssteuer) which has been in effect in the Federal Republic of
                     Germany since January 1, 2009 and the solidarity surcharge (Solidaritätszuschlag)
                     imposed thereon do not constitute a tax as described above in respect of which
                     Additional Amounts would be payable by the Issuer.]

                                                           §8
                                                   PRESENTATION PERIOD
                     The presentation period provided in § 801 paragraph 1, sentence 1 German Civil
                     Code (Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, BGB) is reduced to ten years for the Notes.

                                                            §9
                                                     EVENTS OF DEFAULT
In the case of       [(1) Events of default. Each Holder shall be entitled to declare his Notes due and
Notes issued by      demand immediate redemption thereof at their Final Redemption Amount plus
BASF the following
applies
                     accrued interest (if any) to the date of repayment, in the event that

                     (a) the Issuer fails to pay principal or interest within 30 days from the relevant due
                         date, or
                     (b) the Issuer fails duly to perform any other obligation arising from the Notes and
                         such failure continues unremedied for more than 30 days after the Fiscal Agent
                         has received notice thereof from a Holder, or
                     (c) any Capital Market Indebtedness (as defined in § 2 subparagraph (2)) or a
                         certificate of indebtedness (with an initial maturity of more than one year) of the
                         Issuer becomes prematurely repayable as a result of a default in respect of the
                         terms thereof, or the Issuer fails to fulfil any payment obligation in excess of EUR
                         200,000,000 or the equivalent thereof under any Capital Market Indebtedness or
                         under any certificate of indebtedness or under any guarantees or suretyship given
                         for any Capital Market Indebtedness or a certificate of indebtedness of others
                         within 30 days from its due date or, in the case of a guarantee or suretyship, within
                         30 days of such guarantee or security being invoked, unless the Issuer shall
                         contest in good faith that such payment obligation exists or is due or that such
                         guarantee or suretyship has been validly invoked, or if a security granted in respect
                         thereof is enforced on behalf of or by the creditor(s) entitled thereto, or
                     (d) the Issuer announces its inability to meet its financial obligations generally or
                         ceases its payments, or
                     (e) a court opens insolvency proceedings against the Issuer; such proceedings are
                                                   101


                       instituted and have not been discharged or stayed within 60 days, or the Issuer
                       applies for or institutes such proceedings, or
                    (f) the Issuer ceases all or substantially all of its business operations or sells or
                        disposes of its assets or the substantial part thereof and thus (i) diminishes
                        considerably the value of its assets and (ii) for this reason it becomes likely that the
                        Issuer may not fulfil its payment obligations against the Holders, or
                    (g) the Issuer goes into liquidation unless this is done in connection with a merger or
                        other form of combination with another company or in connection with a
                        reorganization and such other or new company assumes all obligations contracted
                        by the Issuer in connection with the Notes.
                    The right to declare Notes due shall terminate if the situation giving rise to it has been
                    cured before the right is exercised.
                    (2) Quorum. In the events specified in subparagraph (1)(b) and/or subparagraph
                    (1)(c), any notice declaring Notes due shall, unless at the time such notice is received
                    any of the events specified in subparagraph (1)(a) and (1)(d) through (g) entitling
                    Holders to declare their Notes due has occurred, become effective only when the
                    Fiscal Agent has received such notices from the Holders of at least one-tenth in
                    aggregate principal amount of Notes then outstanding.
                    (3) Notice. Any notice, including any notice declaring Notes due, in accordance with
                    subparagraph (1) shall be made by means of a written declaration in the German or
                    English language delivered by hand or registered mail to the specified office of the
                    Fiscal Agent.]

In the case of      [(1) Events of default. Each Holder shall be entitled to declare his Notes due and
Notes issued by     demand immediate redemption thereof at their Final Redemption Amount plus
BASF Finance the
following applies
                    accrued interest (if any) to the date of repayment, in the event that

                    (a) the Issuer fails to pay principal or interest within 30 days from the relevant due
                        date, or
                    (b) the Issuer fails duly to perform any other obligation arising from the Notes or the
                        Guarantor fails to perform any obligation arising from the Guarantee and such
                        failure continues unremedied for more than 30 days after the Fiscal Agent has
                        received notice thereof from a Holder, or
                    (c) any Capital Market Indebtedness (as defined in § 2 subparagraph (2)) or a
                        certificate of indebtedness (with an initial maturity of more than one year) of the
                        Issuer or the Guarantor becomes prematurely repayable as a result of a default in
                        respect of the terms thereof, or the Issuer or the Guarantor fails to fulfil any
                        payment obligation in excess of EUR 200,000,000 or the equivalent thereof under
                        any Capital Market Indebtedness or under any certificate of indebtedness (with an
                        initial maturity of more than one year) or under any guarantees or suretyship given
                        for any Capital Market Indebtedness or a certificate of indebtedness (with an initial
                        maturity of more than one year) of others within 30 days from its due date or, in the
                        case of a guarantee or suretyship, within 30 days of such guarantee or security
                        being invoked, unless the Issuer or the Guarantor shall contest in good faith that
                        such payment obligation exists or is due or that such guarantee or suretyship has
                        been validly invoked, or if a security granted in respect thereof is enforced on
                        behalf of or by the creditor(s) entitled thereto, or
                    (d) the Issuer or the Guarantor announces its inability to meet its financial obligations
                        generally or ceases its payments, or
                    (e) a court opens insolvency proceedings against the Issuer or the Guarantor; such
                        proceedings are instituted and have not been discharged or stayed within 60 days,
                        or the Issuer or the Guarantor applies for or institutes such proceedings, or the
                        Issuer applies for a "surseance van betaling" (within the meaning of The
                        Bankruptcy Act of The Netherlands), or
                    (f) the Issuer or the Guarantor ceases all or substantially all of its business operations
                        or sells or disposes of its assets or the substantial part thereof and thus (i)
                        diminishes considerably the value of its assets and (ii) for this reason it becomes
                        likely that the Issuer or the Guarantor may not fulfil its payment obligations against
                                                    102


                        the Holders, or
                     (g) the Issuer or the Guarantor goes into liquidation unless this is done in connection
                         with a merger or other form of combination with another company or in connection
                         with a reorganization and such other or new company assumes all obligations
                         contracted by the Issuer or the Guarantor, in connection with the Notes; or
                     (h) the Guarantee ceases to be valid and legally binding for any reason whatsoever.
                     The right to declare Notes due shall terminate if the situation giving rise to it has been
                     cured before the right is exercised.
                     (2) Quorum. In the events specified in subparagraph (1)(b) and/or subparagraph
                     (1)(c), any notice declaring Notes due shall, unless at the time such notice is received
                     any of the events specified in subparagraph (1)(a) and (1)(d) through (h) entitling
                     Holders to declare their Notes due has occurred, become effective only when the
                     Fiscal Agent has received such notices from the Holders of at least one-tenth in
                     aggregate principal amount of Notes then outstanding.
                     (3) Notice. Any notice, including any notice declaring Notes due, in accordance with
                     subparagraph (1) shall be made by means of a written declaration in the German or
                     English language delivered by hand or registered mail to the specified office of the
                     Fiscal Agent.]

                                                              § 10
                                                          SUBSTITUTION
In the case of       [(1) Substitution. The Issuer may, without the consent of the Holders, if no payment of
Notes issued by      principal of or interest on any of the Notes is in default, at any time substitute for the
BASF the following
applies
                     Issuer any Affiliate (as defined below) of the Issuer as principal debtor in respect of all
                     obligations arising from or in connection with this issue (the "Substitute Debtor")
                     provided that:]

In the case of       [(1) Substitution. The Issuer may, without the consent of the Holders, if no payment of
Notes issued by      principal of or interest on any of the Notes is in default, at any time substitute for the
BASF Finance the
following applies
                     Issuer either the Guarantor or any Affiliate (as defined below) of the Guarantor as
                     principal debtor in respect of all obligations arising from or in connection with this issue
                     (the "Substitute Debtor") provided that:]
                     (a) the Substitute Debtor assumes all obligations of the Issuer in respect of the Notes;
                     (b) the Substitute Debtor has obtained all necessary authorizations and may transfer
                         to the Fiscal Agent in the currency required and without being obligated to deduct
                         or withhold any taxes or other duties of whatever nature levied by the country in
                         which the Substitute Debtor or the Issuer has its domicile or tax residence, all
                         amounts required for the fulfilment of the payment obligations arising under the
                         Notes;
                     (c) the Substitute Debtor has agreed to indemnify and hold harmless each Holder
                         against any tax, duty, assessment or governmental charge imposed on such
                         Holder in respect of such substitution;
In the case of       [(d) it is guaranteed that the obligations of the Issuer from the Guarantee and the
Notes issued by          Negative Pledge of the Debt Issuance Program of the Issuer (of which the
BASF the following
applies
                         provisions set out below in § 11 applicable to the Notes shall apply mutatis
                         mutandis) apply also to the Notes of the Substitute Debtor; and]

In the case of       [(d) it is guaranteed that the obligations of the Guarantor from the Guarantee and
Notes issued by          the Negative Pledge of the Debt Issuance Program of the Issuer apply also to the
BASF Finance the
following applies
                         Notes of the Substitute Debtor; and]

                     (e) there shall have been delivered to the Fiscal Agent for each jurisdiction affected
                         one opinion of lawyers of recognized standing to the effect that subparagraphs (a),
                         (b), (c) and (d) above have been satisfied.
                     For purposes of this § 10, "Affiliate" shall mean any affiliated company (verbundenes
                     Unternehmen) within the meaning of § 15 German Stock Corporation Act
                                                   103


                    (Aktiengesetz).
                    (2) Notice. Notice of any such substitution shall be published in accordance with § 13.
                    (3) Authorisation of the Issuer. In the event of such substitution, the Issuer is
                    authorised to modify the Global Note representing the Notes and these Terms and
                    Conditions without the consent of the Holders to the extent necessary to reflect the
                    changes resulting from the substitution. An appropriately adjusted global note
                    representing the Notes and Terms and Conditions will be deposited with the Clearing
                    System.

                                                    § 11
                              AMENDMENT OF THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, HOLDERS'
                               REPRESENTATIVE[, AMENDMENT OF THE GUARANTEE]
                    (1) Amendment of the Terms and Conditions. In accordance with the German Act on
                    Debt Securities of 2009, as amended (Schuldverschreibungsgesetz aus
                    Gesamtemissionen – "SchVG") the Holders may agree with the Issuer on
                    amendments of the Terms and Conditions with regard to matters permitted by the
                    SchVG by resolution with the majority specified in subparagraph (2). Majority
                    resolutions shall be binding on all Holders. Resolutions which do not provide for
                    identical conditions for all Holders are void, unless Holders who are disadvantaged
                    have expressly consented to their being treated disadvantageously.
                    (2) Majority. Resolutions shall be passed by a majority of at least 75% of the votes
                    cast. Resolutions relating to amendments of the Terms and Conditions which are not
                    material and which do not relate to the matters listed in § 5 paragraph 3, Nos. 1 to 8 of
                    the SchVG require a simple majority of the votes cast.
                    (3) Resolution of Holders. Resolutions of Holders shall be passed at the election of the
                    Issuer by vote taken without a meeting in accordance with § 18 and §§ 5 et seqq. of
                    the SchVG or in a Holder's meeting in accordance with §§ 5 et seqq. of the SchVG.
                    (4) Chair of the vote taken without a meeting. The vote will be chaired by a notary
                    appointed by the Issuer or, if the Holders' Representative (as defined below) has
                    convened the vote, by the Holders' Representative.
                    (5) Voting rights. Each Holder participating in any vote shall cast votes in accordance
                    with the nominal amount or the notional share of its entitlement to the outstanding
                    Notes.
                    (6) Holders' Representative.
If no Holders'      [The Holders may by majority resolution appoint a common representative (the
Representative is   "Holders' Representative") to exercise the Holders' rights on behalf of each Holder.]
designated in the
Conditions the
following applies


If the Holders'     [The common representative (the "Holders' Representative") shall be [Holder's
Representative is   Representative]. The liability of the Holders' Representative shall be limited to ten
appointed in the
Conditions the
                    times the amount of its annual remuneration, unless the Holders' Representative has
following applies   acted willfully or with gross negligence.]

                    The Holders' Representative shall have the duties and powers provided by law or
                    granted by majority resolution of the Holders. The Holders' Representative shall
                    comply with the instructions of the Holders. To the extent that the Holders'
                    Representative has been authorized to assert certain rights of the Holders, the
                    Holders shall not be entitled to assert such rights themselves, unless explicitly
                    provided for in the relevant majority resolution. The Holders' Representative shall
                    provide reports to the Holders on its activities. The regulations of the SchVG apply
                    with regard to the recall and the other rights and obligations of the Holders'
                    Representative.
                    (7) Procedural Provisions regarding Resolutions of Holders in a Holder's meeting.
                    (a) Notice Period, Registration, Proof.
                    (i)   A Holders' Meeting shall be convened not less than 14 days before the date of
                                104


        the meeting.
(ii)    If the Convening Notice provide(s) that attendance at a Holders' Meeting or the
        exercise of the voting rights shall be dependent upon a registration of the
        Holders before the meeting, then for purposes of calculating the period pursuant
        to subsection (1) the date of the meeting shall be replaced by the date by which
        the Holders are required to register. The registration notice must be received at
        the address set forth in the Convening Notice no later than on the third day
        before the Holders' Meeting.
(iii)   The Convening Notice may provide what proof is required to be entitled to take
        part in the Holders' Meeting. Unless otherwise provided in the Convening Notice,
        for Notes represented by a Global Note a voting certificate obtained from an
        agent to be appointed by the Issuer shall entitle its bearer to attend and vote at
        the Holders' Meeting. A voting certificate may be obtained by a Holder if at least
        six days before the time fixed for the Holders' Meeting, such Holder (a) deposits
        its Notes for such purpose with an agent to be appointed by the Issuer or to the
        order of such agent or (b) blocks its Notes in an account with a Custodian in
        accordance with the procedures of the Custodian and delivers a confirmation
        stating the ownership and blocking of its Notes to the agent of the Issuer. The
        Convening Notice may also require a proof of identity of a person exercising a
        voting right.
(b) Contents of the Convening Notice, Publication.
(i)     The Convening Notice (the "Convening Notice") shall state the name, the place
        of the registered office of the Issuer, the time and venue of the Holders' Meeting,
        and the conditions on which attendance in the Holders' Meeting and the exercise
        of voting rights is made dependent, including the matters referred to in
        subsection (a)(ii) and (iii).
(ii)    The Convening Notice shall be published promptly in the Federal Gazette
        (Bundesanzeiger) and additionally in accordance with the provisions of § 13.
        The costs of publication shall be borne by the Issuer.
(iii)   From the date on which the Holders' Meeting is convened until the date of the
        Holders' Meeting, the Issuer shall make available to the Holders, on the Issuer's
        website the Convening Notice and the precise conditions on which the
        attendance of the Holders' Meeting and the exercise of voting rights shall be
        dependent.
(c) Information Duties, Voting.
(i)     The Issuer shall be obliged to give information at the Holders' Meeting to each
        Holder upon request in so far as such information is required for an informed
        judgment regarding an item on the agenda or a proposed resolution.
(ii)    The provisions of the German Stock Corporation Act (Aktiengesetz) regarding
        the voting of shareholders at general meetings shall apply mutatis mutandis to
        the casting and counting of votes, unless otherwise provided for in the
        Convening Notice.
(d) Publication of Resolutions.
(i)     The Issuer shall at its expense cause publication of the resolutions passed in
        appropriate form. If the registered office of the Issuer is located in Germany, the
        resolutions shall promptly be published in the Federal Gazette (Bundesanzeiger)
        and additionally in accordance with the provisions of § 13. The publication
        prescribed    in    § 50(1)    of   the     German      Securities    Trading   Act
        (Wertpapierhandelsgesetz) shall be sufficient.
(ii)    In addition, the Issuer shall make available to the public the resolutions passed
        and, if the resolutions amend the Terms and Conditions, the wording of the
        original Terms and Conditions, for a period of not less than one month
        commencing on the day following the date of the Holders' Meeting. Such
        publication shall be made on the Issuer's website.
(e) Taking of Votes without Meeting.
The call for the taking of votes shall specify the period within which votes may be cast.
                                                     105


                       Such period shall not be less than 72 hours. During such period, the Holders may cast
                       their votes in text format (Textform) to the person presiding over the taking of votes.
                       The Convening Notice may provide for other forms of casting votes. The call for the
                       taking of votes shall give details as to the prerequisites which must be met for the
                       votes to qualify for being counted.
In the case of         [(8) Amendment of the Guarantee. The provisions set out above applicable to the
Notes issued by        Notes shall apply mutatis mutandis to the Guarantee of BASF.]
BASF Finance the
following applies


                                                         § 12
                                     FURTHER ISSUES, PURCHASES AND CANCELLATION
                       (1) Further Issues. The Issuer may from time to time, without the consent of the
                       Holders, issue further Notes having the same terms and conditions as the Notes in all
                       respects (or in all respects except for the issue date, interest commencement date
                       and/or issue price) so as to form a single Series with the Notes.
                       (2) Purchases. The Issuer may at any time purchase Notes in the open market or
                       otherwise and at any price. Notes purchased by the Issuer may, at the option of the
                       Issuer, be held, resold or surrendered to the Fiscal Agent for cancellation. If purchases
                       are made by tender, tenders for such Notes must be made available to all Holders of
                       such Notes alike.
                       (3) Cancellation. All Notes redeemed in full shall be cancelled forthwith and may not
                       be reissued or resold.

                                                                § 13
                                                              NOTICES
In the case of         [(1) Publication. All notices concerning the Notes will be made by means of electronic
Notes which are        publication on the internet website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
listed on the
official list of the
                       (www.bourse.lu). Any notice so given will be deemed to have been validly given on the
Luxembourg Stock       third day following the date of such publication.
Exchange the
following applies

                       (2) Notification to Clearing System. So long as any Notes are listed on the
                       Luxembourg Stock Exchange, subparagraph (1) shall apply. In the case of notices
                       regarding the Rate of Interest or, if the Rules of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
                       otherwise so permit, the Issuer may deliver the relevant notice to the Clearing System
                       for communication by the Clearing System to the Holders, in lieu of publication as set
                       forth in subparagraph (1) above; any such notice shall be deemed to have been validly
                       given on the seventh day after the day on which the said notice was given to the
                       Clearing System.]

In case of Notes       [(1) Notification to Clearing System. The Issuer shall deliver all notices concerning the
which are unlisted     Notes to the Clearing System for communication by the Clearing System to the
the following
applies
                       Holders. Any such notice shall be deemed to have been validly given on the seventh
                       day after the day on which the said notice was given to the Clearing System.]

                       [(3)] Form of Notice. Notices to be given by any Holder shall be made by means of a
                       declaration in text format (Textform, e.g. email or fax) or in written form sent together
                       with an evidence of the Holder's entitlement in accordance with § 14[(4)] to the Fiscal
                       Agent. Such notice may be given through the Clearing System in such manner as the
                       Fiscal Agent and the Clearing System may approve for such purpose.

                                                       § 14
                             APPLICABLE LAW, PLACE OF JURISDICTION AND ENFORCEMENT
                       (1) Applicable Law. The Notes, as to form and content, and all rights and obligations of
                       the Holders and the Issuer, shall be governed by German law.
                       (2) Submission to Jurisdiction. The District Court (Landgericht) in Frankfurt am Main,
                       Federal Republic of Germany shall have non-exclusive jurisdiction for any action or
                       other legal proceedings ("Proceedings") arising out of or in connection with the
                                                     106


                       Notes.
In the case of         [(3) Appointment of Authorized Agent. For any Proceedings before German courts, the
Notes issued by        Issuer appoints BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Federal
BASF Finance the
following applies
                       Republic of Germany as its authorized agent for service of process in the Federal
                       Republic of Germany.]
                       [(4)] Enforcement. Any Holder of Notes may in any Proceedings against the Issuer, or
                       to which such Holder and the Issuer are parties, protect and enforce in his own name
                       his rights arising under such Notes on the basis of (i) a statement issued by the
                       Custodian with whom such Holder maintains a securities account in respect of the
                       Notes (a) stating the full name and address of the Holder, (b) specifying the
                       aggregate principal amount of Notes credited to such securities account on the date
                       of such statement and (c) confirming that the Custodian has given written notice to
                       the Clearing System containing the information pursuant to (a) and (b) and (ii) a copy
                       of the Note in global form certified as being a true copy by a duly authorized officer of
                       the Clearing System or a depository of the Clearing System, without the need for
                       production in such Proceedings of the actual records or the global note representing
                       the Notes. For purposes of the foregoing, "Custodian" means any bank or other
                       financial institution of recognized standing authorized to engage in securities custody
                       business with which the Holder maintains a securities account in respect of the Notes
                       and includes the Clearing System. Each Holder may, without prejudice to the
                       foregoing, protect and enforce his rights under these Notes also in any other way
                       which is admitted in the country of the Proceedings.

                                                               § 15
                                                            LANGUAGE
If the Terms and       [These Terms and Conditions are written in the German language and provided with
Conditions shall be    an English language translation. The German text shall be controlling and binding.
in the German
language with an
                       The English language translation is provided for convenience only.]
English language
translation the
following applies


If the Terms and       [These Terms and Conditions are written in the English language and provided with a
Conditions shall be    German language translation. The English text shall be controlling and binding. The
in the English lang-
uage with a
                       German language translation is provided for convenience only.]
German language
translation the
following applies


If the Terms and       [These Terms and Conditions are written in the English language only.]
Conditions shall be
in the English
language only the
following applies


In the case of         [Eine deutsche Übersetzung der Anleihebedingungen wird bei der BASF SE, Carl-
Notes that are         Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Bundesrepublik Deutschland, zur
publicly offered, in
whole or in part, in
                       kostenlosen Ausgabe bereitgehalten.]
Germany or
distributed, in
whole or in part, to
non-qualified
investors in
Germany with
English language
Terms and
Conditions the
following applies
                                                   107


                                    TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES
                                        GERMAN LANGUAGE VERSION

                            (DEUTSCHE FASSUNG DER ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN)
Einführung            Die Anleihebedingungen für die Schuldverschreibungen (die "Anleihebedingungen")
                      sind nachfolgend in zwei Optionen aufgeführt:

                      Option I umfasst den Satz der Anleihebedingungen, der auf Tranchen von
                      Schuldverschreibungen mit fester Verzinsung Anwendung findet.

                      Option II umfasst den Satz der Anleihebedingungen, der auf Tranchen von
                      Schuldverschreibungen mit variabler Verzinsung Anwendung findet.

                      Der Satz von Anleihebedingungen für jede dieser Optionen enthält bestimmte weitere
                      Optionen, die entsprechend gekennzeichnet sind, indem die jeweilige optionale
                      Bestimmung durch Instruktionen und Erklärungen entweder links von dem Satz der
                      Anleihebedingungen oder in eckigen Klammern innerhalb des Satzes der
                      Anleihebedingungen bezeichnet wird.

                      In den Endgültigen Bedingungen wird die Emittentin festlegen, welche der Option I
                      oder Option II (einschließlich der jeweils enthaltenen bestimmten weiteren Optionen)
                      für die einzelne Emission von Schuldverschreibungen Anwendung findet, indem
                      entweder die betreffenden Angaben wiederholt werden oder auf die betreffenden
                      Optionen verwiesen wird.

                      Soweit weder die Emittentin noch die Garantin zum Zeitpunkt der Billigung des
                      Prospektes Kenntnis von bestimmten Angaben hatte, die auf eine einzelne Emission
                      von Schuldverschreibungen anwendbar sind, enthält dieser Prospekt Leerstellen in
                      eckigen Klammern, die die maßgeblichen durch die Endgültigen Bedingungen zu
                      vervollständigenden Angaben enthalten.

Im Fall, dass die     [Die Bestimmungen dieser Anleihebedingungen gelten für diese Schuldverschrei-
Endgültigen           bungen so, wie sie durch die Angaben der beigefügten endgültigen Bedingungen (die
Bedingungen, die
für eine einzelne
                      "Endgültigen Bedingungen") vervollständigt werden. Die Leerstellen in den auf die
Emission              Schuldverschreibungen anwendbaren Bestimmungen dieser Anleihebedingungen
anwendbar sind,       gelten als durch die in den Endgültigen Bedingungen enthaltenen Angaben ausgefüllt,
nur auf die           als ob die Leerstellen in den betreffenden Bestimmungen durch diese Angaben
weiteren Optionen     ausgefüllt    wären;     alternative    oder     wählbare    Bestimmungen      dieser
verweisen, die im
Satz der Anleihe-
                      Anleihebedingungen, deren Entsprechungen in den Endgültigen Bedingungen nicht
bedingungen der       ausgefüllt oder die gestrichen sind, gelten als aus diesen Anleihebedingungen
Option I oder         gestrichen; sämtliche auf die Schuldverschreibungen nicht anwendbaren
Option II enthalten   Bestimmungen dieser Anleihebedingungen (einschließlich der Anweisungen,
sind, ist Folgendes   Anmerkungen und der Texte in eckigen Klammern) gelten als aus diesen
anwendbar             Anleihebedingungen gestrichen, so dass die Bestimmungen der Endgültigen
                      Bedingungen Geltung erhalten. Kopien der Endgültigen Bedingungen sind kostenlos
                      bei der bezeichneten Geschäftsstelle des Fiscal Agent und bei der
                      Hauptgeschäftsstelle der Emittentin erhältlich; bei nicht an einer Börse notierten
                      Schuldverschreibungen sind Kopien der betreffenden Endgültigen Bedingungen
                      allerdings ausschließlich für die Gläubiger solcher Schuldverschreibungen erhältlich.]
                                                     108




                      OPTION I – Anleihebedingungen für Schuldverschreibungen mit fester
                      Verzinsung


                                ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN DER SCHULDVERSCHREIBUNGEN
                                          DEUTSCHSPRACHIGE FASSUNG

                                                     §1
                               WÄHRUNG, STÜCKELUNG, FORM, BESTIMMTE DEFINITIONEN
                      (1) Währung; Stückelung. Diese Serie der Schuldverschreibungen (die
                      "Schuldverschreibungen") der [BASF SE] [BASF Finance Europe N.V.]
                      (["BASF"]["BASF Finance"] oder die "Emittentin") wird in [festgelegte Währung]
                      (die "festgelegte Währung") im Gesamtnennbetrag [Falls die Globalurkunde eine
                      NGN ist, ist Folgendes anwendbar: (vorbehaltlich § 1 Absatz (4))] von
                      [Gesamtnennbetrag] (in Worten: [Gesamtnennbetrag in Worten]) in einer
                      Stückelung von [festgelegte Stückelung] (die "festgelegte Stückelung") begeben.
                      (2) Form. Die Schuldverschreibungen lauten auf den Inhaber.
Im Fall von           [(3) Dauerglobalurkunde. Die Schuldverschreibungen sind durch eine Dauerglobal-
Schuldver-            urkunde (die "Dauerglobalurkunde") ohne Zinsscheine verbrieft. Die Dauerglobal-
schreibungen, die
durch eine
                      urkunde trägt die Unterschriften ordnungsgemäß bevollmächtigter Vertreter der
Dauerglobal-          Emittentin und ist von dem Fiscal Agent oder in dessen Namen mit einer
urkunde verbrieft     Kontrollunterschrift versehen. Einzelurkunden und Zinsscheine werden nicht
sind, ist Folgendes   ausgegeben.]
anwendbar (für
Schuldverschrei-
bungen, die nach
den C Rules
begeben und/oder
die von oder für
CDS verwahrt
werden)


Im Fall von           [(3) Vorläufige Globalurkunde – Austausch.
Schuldver-
schreibungen, die     (a) Die Schuldverschreibungen sind anfänglich durch eine vorläufige Globalurkunde
anfänglich durch          (die "vorläufige Globalurkunde") ohne Zinsscheine verbrieft. Die vorläufige
eine vorläufige           Globalurkunde wird gegen Schuldverschreibungen in der festgelegten Stückelung,
Globalurkunde
verbrieft sind, ist
                          die durch eine Dauerglobalurkunde (die "Dauerglobalurkunde") ohne
Folgendes                 Zinsscheine verbrieft sind, ausgetauscht. Die vorläufige Globalurkunde und die
anwendbar                 Dauerglobalurkunde tragen jeweils die Unterschriften ordnungsgemäß
Schuldverschrei-          bevollmächtigter Vertreter der Emittentin und sind jeweils von dem Fiscal Agent
bungen, die nach          oder in dessen Namen mit einer Kontrollunterschrift versehen. Einzelurkunden
den D Rules
begeben werden)
                          und Zinsscheine werden nicht ausgegeben.

                      (b) Die vorläufige Globalurkunde wird frühestens an einem Tag gegen die
                          Dauerglobalurkunde austauschbar, der 40 Tage nach dem Tag der Begebung der
                          durch die vorläufige Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen liegt. Ein
                          solcher Austausch darf nur nach Vorlage von Bescheinigungen gemäß U.S.
                          Steuerrecht erfolgen, wonach der oder die wirtschaftlichen Eigentümer der durch
                          die vorläufige Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen keine U.S.-
                          Personen sind (ausgenommen bestimmte Finanzinstitute oder bestimmte
                          Personen, die Schuldverschreibungen über solche Finanzinstitute halten).
                          Zinszahlungen     auf    durch    eine   vorläufige      Globalurkunde      verbriefte
                          Schuldverschreibungen erfolgen erst nach Vorlage solcher Bescheinigungen. Eine
                          gesonderte Bescheinigung ist für jede solche Zinszahlung erforderlich. Jede
                          Bescheinigung, die am oder nach dem 40. Tag nach dem Tag der Ausgabe der
                          durch die vorläufige Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen eingeht,
                          wird als ein Ersuchen behandelt werden, diese vorläufige Globalurkunde gemäß
                          diesem Absatz (b) dieses § 1 Absatz (3) auszutauschen. Wertpapiere, die im
                          Austausch für die vorläufige Globalurkunde geliefert werden, dürfen nur außerhalb
                          der Vereinigten Staaten (wie in § 6 Absatz (2) definiert) geliefert werden.]
                                                 109



                    (4) Clearing System. Die Globalurkunde, die die Schuldverschreibung verbrieft, wird
                    von [einem oder für ein Clearing Systems verwahrt. "Clearing System" bedeutet [Bei
                    mehr als einem Clearing System ist Folgendes anwendbar: jeweils] Folgendes:
                    [Clearstream Banking AG, Neue Börsenstr. 1, 60487 Frankfurt am Main,
                    Bundesrepublik Deutschland, ("CBF")] [Clearstream Banking S.A., 42 Avenue JF
                    Kennedy, 1855 Luxemburg, Großherzogtum Luxemburg, ("CBL") und Euroclear Bank
                    SA/NV, Boulevard du Roi Albert II, 1210 Brussels, Belgien, ("Euroclear") (CBL und
                    Euroclear jeweils ein "ICSD" und zusammen die "ICSDs")] sowie jeder
                    Funktionsnachfolger.][CDS & Co. als Beauftragte für CDS Clearing and Depository
                    Services Inc. ("CDS" oder das "Clearing System") verwahrt.]
Im Fall von         [Die Schuldverschreibungen werden in Form einer New Global Note ("NGN")
Schuldverschrei-    ausgegeben und von einem common safekeeper im Namen beider ICSDs verwahrt.
bungen, die im
Namen der ICSDs     Der     Gesamtnennbetrag       der     durch    die    Globalurkunde     verbrieften
verwahrt werden,    Schuldverschreibungen entspricht dem jeweils in den Registern beider ICSDs
und die
Globalurkunde
                    eingetragenen Gesamtbetrag. Die Register der ICSDs (unter denen die Register zu
eine NGN ist, ist   verstehen sind, die jeder ICSD für seine Kunden über den Betrag ihres Anteils an den
Folgendes           Schuldverschreibungen führt) sind maßgeblicher Nachweis des Gesamtnennbetrages
anwendbar           der durch die Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen, und eine für zu
                    diesem Zweck von einem ICSD jeweils ausgestellte Bescheinigung mit dem Betrag
                    der so verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen ist maßgebliche Bescheinigung des Inhalts
                    des Registers des betreffenden ICSD zu dem fraglichen Zeitpunkt.
                    Bei jeder Tilgung oder einer Zinszahlung auf die durch die Globalurkunde verbrieften
                    Schuldverschreibungen bzw. beim Kauf und der Entwertung der durch die
                    Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen stellt die Emittentin sicher, dass
                    die Einzelheiten der Rückzahlung, Zahlung oder des Kaufs und der Entwertung
                    bezüglich der Globalurkunde entsprechend in die Unterlagen der ICSDs eingetragen
                    werden, und dass nach dieser Eintragung vom Gesamtnennbetrag der in die Register
                    der ICSDs aufgenommenen und durch die Globalurkunde verbrieften
                    Schuldverschreibungen der Gesamtnennbetrag der zurückgekauften bzw. gekauften
                    und entwerteten Schuldverschreibungen abgezogen wird.
                    [Falls die vorläufige Globalurkunde eine NGN ist, ist Folgendes anwendbar: Bei
                    Austausch nur eines Teils von Schuldverschreibungen, die durch eine vorläufige
                    Globalurkunde verbrieft sind, wird die Emittentin sicherstellen, dass die Einzelheiten
                    dieses Austauschs entsprechend in die Register der ICSDs aufgenommen werden.]]

Im Fall von         [Die Schuldverschreibungen werden in Form einer Classical Global Note ("CGN")
Schuldverschrei-    ausgegeben und von einer gemeinsamen Verwahrstelle im Namen beider ICSDs
bungen, die im
Namen der ICSDs
                    verwahrt.]
verwahrt werden,
und die
Globalurkunde
eine CGN ist, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall von         [Das wirtschaftliche Eigentum an der Dauerglobalurkunde wird durch
Schuldverschrei-
bungen, die durch
                    Buchungserfassungskonten (book-entry accounts) von Finanzinstituten vermittelt, die
eine                im Namen der wirtschaftlichen Eigentümer handeln und direkte oder indirekte
Dauerglobalur-      Teilnehmer bei CDS sind. Rechte an der Dauerglobalurkunde können durch
kunde verbrieft     Teilnehmer an diesen Systemen unmittelbar jeweils in Kanada durch CDS, 85,
werden, die von
oder für CDS
                    Richmond Street West, Toronto, Ontario, Kanada 115H 2C9 oder in Europa durch
verwahrt werden,    Clearstream Banking S.A., 42 Avenue JF Kennedy, 1855 Luxemburg,
ist Folgendes       Großherzogtum Luxemburg, ("CBL") und Euroclear Bank SA/NV, Boulevard du Roi
anwendbar           Albert II, 1210 Brussels, Belgien, ("Euroclear") (CBL und Euroclear jeweils ein
                    "ICSD" und zusammen die "ICSDs") gehalten werden, oder mittelbar durch
                    Organisationen, die Teilnehmer an diesen Systemen sind. CBL und Euroclear werden
                    Rechte im Namen ihrer Teilnehmer durch Wertpapierkonten in ihrem eigenen Namen
                    bei den jeweiligen kanadischen Unterverwahrern halten, welche jeweils amtlich
                    zugelassene kanadische Banken sind (Canadian Schedule I Chartered Bank)
                                                 110


                    ("Kanadische Unterverwahrer"). Die Kanadischen Unterverwahrer werden diese
                    Rechte ihrerseits wiederum durch Wertpapierkonten im eigenen Namen bei CDS
                    halten.
                    Solange die Dauerglobalurkunde noch Schuldverschreibungen verbrieft, werden die
                    Emittentin, der Fiscal Agent und jede andere Zahlstelle die CDS & Co., oder jede
                    andere von CDS benannte Stelle, für alle Zwecke als einzigen Gläubiger der
                    Dauerglobalurkunde behandeln. Die durch die Dauerglobalurkunde verbrieften
                    Schuldverschreibungen sind nur in Übereinstimmungen mit den Regeln und
                    Verfahren der CDS übertragbar. Direkte Rechte können nur in Übereinstimmung mit
                    den Anleihebedingungen und den Regeln und Verfahren der CDS ausgeübt werden.
                    Außer in den nachstehenden beschränkten Fällen hat kein wirtschaftlicher
                    Eigentümer der Schuldverschreibungen einen Anspruch auf die physische Lieferung
                    von in Einzelurkunden verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen. Die Emittentin wird
                    Einzelurkunden verbriefen oder verbriefen lassen und die Dauerglobalurkunde durch
                    sie    ersetzen,    wenn     die   durch    die   Dauerglobalurkunde     verbrieften
                    Schuldverschreibungen von oder für CDS gehalten werden und (i) CDS die Emittentin
                    benachrichtigt hat, dass sie nicht gewillt oder nicht in der Lage ist weiter
                    Verwahrsstelle für die Schuldverschreibungen zu sein und die Emittentin 90 Zahltage
                    (wie in § 4 Absatz (4) definiert) nach Erhalt einer solchen Benachrichtigung keine
                    Nachfolge-Hinterlegungsstelle benannt hat; oder (ii) CDS aufhört eine nach dem
                    Wertpapiergesetz von Ontario (Securities Act (Ontario)) anerkannte Clearingstelle
                    oder eine Selbstregulierungsorganisation (self-regulatory organisation) nach dem
                    Wertpapiergesetz von Québec (Securities Act (Québec)) oder einer anderen
                    kanadischen Wertpapiervorschrift zu sein und kein anderes für die Emittentin
                    zufriedenstellendes    Clearingsystem innerhalb      von    90   Zahltagen     nach
                    Kenntniserlangung der Emittentin vom Verlust der oben benannten Eigenschaft
                    seitens der CDS benannt wird.]
                    (5) Gläubiger von Schuldverschreibungen. "Gläubiger" bedeutet jeder Inhaber eines
                    Miteigentumsanteils oder [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die durch eine
                    Dauerglobalurkunde verbrieft werden, die von oder für CDS verwahrt werden,
                    ist Folgendes anwendbar (vorbehaltlich anderweitiger Regelungen gemäß § 1(4)
                    oben und § 4(1) nachstehend)] anderen vergleichbaren Rechts an den
                    Schuldverschreibungen.

                                                     §2
                                 STATUS, NEGATIVVERPFLICHTUNG[, GARANTIE UND
                                     NEGATIVVERPFLICHTUNG DER GARANTIN]
                    (1) Status. Die Schuldverschreibungen begründen nicht besicherte und nicht
                    nachrangige Verbindlichkeiten der Emittentin, die untereinander und mit allen
                    anderen nicht besicherten und nicht nachrangigen Verbindlichkeiten der Emittentin
                    gleichrangig sind, soweit diesen Verbindlichkeiten nicht durch zwingende gesetzliche
                    Bestimmungen ein Vorrang eingeräumt wird.
                    (2) Negativverpflichtung.    Die    Emittentin    verpflichtet    sich,     solange
                    Schuldverschreibungen ausstehen, jedoch nur bis zu dem Zeitpunkt, an dem alle
                    Beträge an Kapital und Zinsen dem Fiscal Agent zur Verfügung gestellt worden sind,
                    keine gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeiten und keine
                    Garantien     oder    andere   Gewährleistungen    dafür    durch    Grund-    oder
                    Mobiliarpfandrechte an ihrem Vermögen zu besichern, ohne jeweils die Gläubiger zur
                    gleichen Zeit und im gleichen Rang an solchen Sicherheiten oder an solchen anderen
                    Sicherheiten, die von einem internationalen angesehenen unabhängigen
                    Wirtschaftsprüfer als gleichwertige Sicherheit anerkannt werden, teilnehmen zu
                    lassen.
                    "Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit" bezeichnet jede Verbindlichkeit hinsichtlich der
                    Rückzahlung aufgenommener Geldbeträge, die durch Schuldverschreibungen oder
                    sonstige Wertpapiere mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr, die
                    an einer Börse oder an einem anderen anerkannten Wertpapiermarkt notiert oder
                    gehandelt werden oder werden können, verbrieft oder verkörpert ist.
Im Fall von         [(3) Garantie und Negativverpflichtung der Garantin. BASF (die "Garantin") hat die
Schuldver-          unbedingte und unwiderrufliche Garantie (die "Garantie") für die ordnungsgemäße
schreibungen, die
                                                          111


von BASF Finance         und pünktliche Zahlung von Kapital und Zinsen und sonstiger auf die
begeben werden,          Schuldverschreibungen zahlbarer Beträge übernommen. Die Garantin hat sich
ist Folgendes
anwendbar
                         außerdem in einer Negativverpflichtung (die "Negativverpflichtung") verpflichtet,
                         solange Schuldverschreibungen ausstehen, jedoch nur bis zu dem Zeitpunkt, an dem
                         alle Beträge an Kapital und Zinsen dem Fiscal Agent zur Verfügung gestellt worden
                         sind, keine gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeiten (wie
                         vorstehend definiert) und keine Garantien oder andere Gewährleistungen dafür durch
                         Grund- oder Mobiliarpfandrechte an ihrem Vermögen zu besichern oder eine solche
                         Besicherung zu diesem Zweck bestehen zu lassen, ohne gleichzeitig die Gläubiger
                         an derselben Sicherheit oder an solchen anderen Sicherheiten, die von einem
                         internationalen angesehenen unabhängigen Wirtschaftsprüfer als gleichwertige
                         Sicherheit anerkannt werden, im gleichen Rang und gleichem Verhältnis teilnehmen
                         zu lassen. Die Garantie und die Negativverpflichtung stellen einen Vertrag zugunsten
                         jedes Gläubigers als begünstigtem Dritten gemäß § 328 BGB dar, welcher das Recht
                         jedes Gläubigers begründet, Erfüllung aus der Garantie und der Negativverpflichtung
                         unmittelbar von der Garantin zu verlangen und die Garantie und die
                         Negativverpflichtung unmittelbar gegen die Garantin durchzusetzen.]

                                                                      §3
                                                                    ZINSEN
                         (1) Zinssatz und Zinszahlungstage.
Falls die                [Die Schuldverschreibungen werden bezogen auf ihren Gesamtnennbetrag verzinst,
Schuldverschrei-         und zwar vom [Verzinsungsbeginn] (einschließlich) bis zum Fälligkeitstag (wie in § 5
bungen mit einem
gleichbleibenden
                         Absatz (1) definiert) (ausschließlich) mit jährlich [Zinssatz]%. Die Zinsen sind
Zinssatz                 nachträglich am [Festzinstermin(e)] eines jeden Jahres zahlbar (jeweils ein
ausgestattet sind,       "Zinszahlungstag").]
ist folgendes
anwendbar


Falls die                [Die Schuldverschreibungen werden bezogen auf ihren Gesamtnennbetrag wie folgt
Schuldverschreibu        verzinst. Zinsen sind nachträglich am jeweiligen Zinszahlungstag zahlbar.
ngen mit
verschiedenen
Zinssätzen
ausgestattet sind,
ist folgendes
anwendbar
                                     vom                              bis
                                (einschließlich)                (ausschließlich)                      % p.a.

                                    [Daten]                        [Daten]                        [Zinssätze]]
                                                                 (jeweils ein
                                                             "Zinszahlungstag")

                         Die erste Zinszahlung erfolgt am [erster Zinszahlungstag] [Sofern der erste
                         Zinszahlungstag nicht der erste Jahrestag des Verzinsungsbeginns ist, ist
                         Folgendes anwendbar: und beläuft sich auf [anfänglicher Bruchteilzinsbetrag je
                         festgelegte Stückelung].] [Sofern der Fälligkeitstag kein Festzinstermin ist, ist
                         Folgendes anwendbar: Die Zinsen für den Zeitraum vom [letzter dem
                         Fälligkeitstag vorausgehender Festzinstermin] (einschließlich) bis zum
                         Fälligkeitstag  (ausschließlich)    belaufen     sich   auf    [abschließenden
                         Bruchteilzinsbetrag je festgelegte Stückelung].]
                         (2) Auflaufende Zinsen. Falls die Emittentin die Schuldverschreibungen bei Fälligkeit
                         nicht einlöst, erfolgt die Verzinsung der Schuldverschreibungen vom Tag der
                         Fälligkeit bis zum Tag der tatsächlichen Rückzahlung der Schuldverschreibungen in
                         Höhe des gesetzlich festgelegten Satzes für Verzugszinsen.(1)
                         (3) Berechnung der Zinsen für Teile von Zeiträumen. Sofern Zinsen für einen
                         Zeitraum von weniger als einem Jahr zu berechnen sind, erfolgt die Berechnung auf
                         der Grundlage des Zinstagequotienten (wie nachstehend definiert).

(1)   Der gesetzliche Verzugszinssatz beträgt für das Jahr fünf Prozentpunkte über dem von der Deutsche Bundesbank von Zeit
      zu Zeit veröffentlichten Basiszinssatz, §§ 288 Absatz 1, 247 Absatz 1 BGB.
                                                    112



                      (4) Zinstagequotient. "Zinstagequotient" bezeichnet im Hinblick auf die Berechnung
                      eines Zinsbetrages auf eine Schuldverschreibung für einen beliebigen Zeitraum (der
                      "Zinsberechnungszeitraum"):
Im Fall von           [die tatsächliche Anzahl von Tagen im Zinsberechnungszeitraum, geteilt durch die
Actual/Actual         tatsächliche Anzahl von Tagen in der jeweiligen Zinsperiode.]
(ICMA Regelung
251) mit nur einer
Zinsperiode
innerhalb eines
Zinsjahres
(ausschließlich
dem Fall eines
ersten oder letzten
kurzen oder langen
Kupons) ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall von           [die Anzahl von Tagen in dem Zinsberechnungszeitraum, geteilt durch die Anzahl der
Actual/Actual         Tage in der Bezugsperiode, in die der Zinsberechnungszeitraum fällt.]
(ICMA Regelung
251) mit jährlichen
Zinszahlungen
(einschließlich
dem Fall eines
ersten oder letzten
kurzen Kupons) ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall von           [die Anzahl von Tagen in dem Zinsberechnungszeitraum, geteilt durch das Produkt
Actual/Actual         aus (1) der Anzahl der Tage in der Bezugsperiode, in die der
(ICMA Regelung
251) mit zwei oder
                      Zinsberechnungszeitraum fällt und (2) der Anzahl von Zinszahlungstagen, die in ein
mehr                  Kalenderjahr fallen oder fallen würden, falls Zinsen für das gesamte Jahr zu zahlen
gleichbleibenden      wären.]
Zinsperioden
(einschließlich
dem Fall eines
ersten oder letzten
kurzen Kupons)
innerhalb eines
Zinsjahres ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall von           [die Summe aus:
Actual/Actual
(ICMA Regelung        (a)   der Anzahl von Tagen in dem Zinsberechnungszeitraum, die in die
251) und wenn der            Bezugsperiode fallen, in welcher der Zinsberechnungszeitraum beginnt, geteilt
Zinsberechnungs-             durch [Im Fall von Bezugsperioden, die kürzer sind als ein Jahr, ist
zeitraum länger ist
als eine                     Folgendes anwendbar: das Produkt aus (x)] [die] [der] Anzahl der Tage in
Bezugsperiode                dieser Bezugsperiode [Im Fall von Bezugsperioden, die kürzer sind als ein
(langer Kupon) ist           Jahr, ist Folgendes anwendbar: und (y) der Anzahl von Zinszahlungstagen,
Folgendes                    die in ein Kalenderjahr fallen oder fallen würden, falls Zinsen für das gesamte
anwendbar                    Jahr zu zahlen wären]; und
                      (b)   der Anzahl von Tagen in dem Zinsberechnungszeitraum, die in die nächste
                            Bezugsperiode fallen, geteilt durch [Im Fall von Bezugsperioden, die kürzer
                            sind als ein Jahr, ist Folgendes anwendbar: das Produkt aus (x)] [die] [der]
                            Anzahl der Tage in dieser Bezugsperiode [Im Fall von Bezugsperioden, die
                            kürzer sind als ein Jahr, ist Folgendes anwendbar: und (y) der Anzahl von
                            Zinszahlungstagen, die in ein Kalenderjahr fallen oder fallen würden, falls
                            Zinsen für das gesamte Jahr zu zahlen wären].

Folgendes gilt für    ["Bezugsperiode" bezeichnet den Zeitraum ab dem Verzinsungsbeginn
alle Optionen von
Actual/Actual
                      (einschließlich) bis zum ersten Zinszahlungstag (ausschließlich) oder von jedem
                      Zinszahlungstag (einschließlich) bis zum nächsten Zinszahlungstag (ausschließlich).
                                                   113


(ICMA Regelung        [Im Fall eines ersten oder letzten kurzen Zinsberechnungszeitraumes ist
251) anwendbar
                      Folgendes anwendbar: Zum Zwecke der Bestimmung der maßgeblichen
außer Option
Actual/Actual         Bezugsperiode gilt der [Fiktive Zinszahlungstag] als Zinszahlungstag.] [Im Fall
(ICMA Regelung        eines ersten oder letzten langen Zinsberechnungszeitraumes ist Folgendes
251) mit jährlichen   anwendbar: Zum Zwecke der Bestimmung der maßgeblichen Bezugsperiode gelten
Zinszahlungen
                      der [Fiktiver Zinszahlungstag] als Zinszahlungstage].]
(ausschließlich
dem Fall eines
ersten oder letzten
kurzen oder langen
Kupons)


Im Fall von           [die tatsächliche Anzahl von Tagen im Zinsberechnungszeitraum, dividiert durch
Actual/365 (Fixed)    365.]
ist Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall von 30/360,   [die Anzahl von Tagen im Zinsberechnungszeitraum, dividiert durch 360, wobei die
360/360 oder Bond     Anzahl der Tage auf der Grundlage eines Jahres von 360 Tagen mit zwölf Monaten
Basis ist
Folgendes
                      zu je 30 Tagen zu ermitteln ist (es sei denn, (A) der letzte Tag des
anwendbar             Zinsberechnungszeitraums fällt auf den 31. Tag eines Monates, während der erste
                      Tag des Zinsberechnungszeitraumes weder auf den 30. noch auf den 31. Tag eines
                      Monats fällt, in welchem Fall der diesen Tag enthaltende Monat nicht als ein auf 30
                      Tage verkürzter Monat zu behandeln ist, oder (B) der letzte Tag des
                      Zinsberechnungszeitraumes fällt auf den letzten Tag des Monats Februar, in
                      welchem Fall der Monat Februar nicht als ein auf 30 Tage verlängerter Monat zu
                      behandeln ist).]

Im Fall von 30E/360   [die Anzahl der Tage im Zinsberechnungszeitraum, dividiert durch 360 (dabei ist die
oder Eurobond         Anzahl der Tage auf der Grundlage eines Jahres von 360 Tagen mit 12 Monaten zu
Basis ist
Folgendes
                      30 Tagen zu ermitteln, und zwar ohne Berücksichtigung des Datums des ersten oder
anwendbar             letzten Tages des Zinsberechnungszeitraumes).]

Im Fall von auf       [(5) Interest Act (Canada). Für die Zwecke der nach dem Interest Act (Canada)
CAD lautenden         geforderten Offenlegung, ist, wann immer Zinsen auf der Basis eines anderen
Schuldverschrei-
bungen, die von
                      Zeitraums als einem Kalenderjahr zu berechnen sind, der jährliche Zinssatz, der für
oder für CDS          die Zwecke des Interest Act (Canada) dem impliziten Zinssatz einer solchen
verwahrt werden,      Berechnung entspricht, der jeweilige implizite Zinssatz multipliziert mit der
ist Folgendes         tatasächlichen Anzahl von Tagen in dem Kalenderjahr, in welchem derselbe
anwendbar             festgestellt wird, geteilt durch die Anzahl der Tage, auf der Basis derer eine solche
                      Berechnung vorgenommen wurde. Der vorstehende Satz ist eine nach dem
                      kanadischen Recht geforderte Offenlegung und, um Zweifel zu vermeiden, nichts in
                      diesem Absatz (5) ändert in irgendeiner Weise die Methode, nach der Zinsen auf die
                      Schuldverschreibungen für einen beliebigen Zeitraum zu berechnen sind.]

                                                             §4
                                                         ZAHLUNGEN
Im Fall von           (1) [(a) Zahlungen auf Kapital. Zahlungen auf Kapital in Bezug auf die
Zahlungen von         Schuldverschreibungen erfolgen nach Maßgabe des nachstehenden Absatzes (2) an
Kapital oder
Zinsen auf eine
                      das Clearing System oder dessen Order zur Gutschrift auf den Konten der jeweiligen
Globalurkunde ist     Kontoinhaber des Clearing Systems.
Folgendes
anwendbar

                      (b) Zahlung von Zinsen. Die Zahlung von Zinsen auf Schuldverschreibungen erfolgt
                      nach Maßgabe von Absatz (2) an das Clearing System oder dessen Order zur
                      Gutschrift auf den Konten der jeweiligen Kontoinhaber des Clearing Systems.


Im Fall von           [Die Zahlung von Zinsen auf Schuldverschreibungen, die durch die vorläufige
Zinszahlungen auf     Globalurkunde verbrieft sind, erfolgt nach Maßgabe von Absatz (2) an das Clearing
eine vorläufige
Globalurkunde ist
                      System oder dessen Order zur Gutschrift auf den Konten der jeweiligen Kontoinhaber
Folgendes             des Clearing Systems, und zwar nach ordnungsgemäßer Bescheinigung gemäß § 1
                                                  114


anwendbar            Absatz (3)(b).]]

Im Fall von          [Zahlung von Kapital und Zinsen, Erfüllung. Zahlungen auf Kapital und Zinsen in
Zahlungen von        Bezug auf die Schuldverschreibungen erfolgen an CDS & Co., oder jede andere von
Kapital oder
Zinsen auf eine
                     CDS benannte Stelle, und CDS wird die erhaltene Zahlung an die jeweiligen
Dauerglobal-         Wertpapierkonten verteilen. CDS & Co., oder jede andere von CDS benannte Stelle,
urkunde, die von     welche als einziger Gläubiger der Dauerglobalurkunde zu behandeln ist, ist die
oder für CDS         einzige zum Empfang von Zahlungen auf die durch die Dauerglobalurkunde
verwahrt wird, ist   verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen berechtigte Person und die Emittentin wird durch
Folgendes
                     jede so an den einzigen Gläubiger dieser Dauerglobalurkunde oder nach dessen
anwendbar
                     Order geleistete Zahlung von ihrer Zahlungspflicht befreit. Jeder in den Registern der
                     CDS geführte wirtschaftliche Eigentümer eines jeweiligen Nennbetrags der durch die
                     Dauerglobalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen muss sich wegen seines
                     oder ihres Anteils jeder so durch die Emittentin an den einzigen Gläubiger der
                     Dauerglobalurkunde oder nach dessen Order geleisteten Zahlung ausschließlich an
                     CDS wenden. Außer dem einzigen Gläubiger der Dauerglobalurkunde hat keine
                     andere Person einen Anspruch gegen die Emittentin in Bezug auf eine fällige Zahlung
                     auf diese Dauerglobalurkunde.]
                     (2) Zahlungsweise. Vorbehaltlich (i) geltender steuerlicher und sonstiger gesetzlicher
                     Regelungen und Vorschriften und (ii) eines Einbehalts oder Abzugs aufgrund eines
                     Vertrags wie in Section 1471(b) des U.S. Internal Revenue Code von 1986 (der
                     "Code") beschrieben bzw. anderweit gemäß Section 1471 bis Section 1474 des Code
                     auferlegt, etwaigen aufgrund dessen getroffener Regelungen oder geschlossener
                     Abkommen, etwaiger offizieller Auslegungen davon, oder von Gesetzen zur
                     Umsetzung einer Regierungszusammenarbeit dazu [Im Fall von auf Renminbi
                     lautenden Schuldverschreibungen ist Folgendes anwendbar: und vorbehaltlich
                     der Abwicklung zum USD-Gegenwert aufgrund Fehlender Konvertierbarkeit,
                     Fehlender Übertragbarkeit oder Illiquidität gemäß Absatz (7)] erfolgen zu leistende
                     Zahlungen auf die Schuldverschreibungen in der festgelegten Währung.
Im Fall von          [(3) Erfüllung. Die Emittentin wird durch Leistung der Zahlung an das Clearing System
Zahlungen von        oder dessen Order von ihrer Zahlungspflicht befreit.]
Kapital oder
Zinsen auf eine
Global-urkunde,
die von oder für
CBF oder die im
Namen der ICSDs
verwahrt wird, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar

                     [(4)] Zahltag. Fällt der Fälligkeitstag einer Zahlung in Bezug auf eine
                     Schuldverschreibung auf einen Tag, der kein Zahltag ist, dann hat der Gläubiger
                     keinen Anspruch auf Zahlung vor dem nächsten Zahltag am jeweiligen Geschäftsort.
                     Der Gläubiger ist nicht berechtigt, weitere Zinsen oder sonstige Zahlungen aufgrund
                     dieser Verspätung zu verlangen.
                     Für diese Zwecke bezeichnet "Zahltag" einen Tag, der
Falls die            [ein Tag (außer einem Samstag oder Sonntag) ist, an dem Geschäftsbanken und
festgelegte          Devisenmärkte Zahlungen in [relevante(s) Finanzzentrum(en)] abwickeln und an
Währung nicht
EUR ist, ist
                     dem das Clearing System geöffnet ist, um Zahlungen abzuwickeln.]
Folgendes
anwendbar


Falls die            [ein Tag (außer einem Samstag oder Sonntag) ist, an dem das Clearing System
festgelegte          sowie alle betroffenen Bereiche des Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross
Währung EUR ist,
ist Folgendes
                     Settlement Express Transfer System 2 ("TARGET") geöffnet sind, um Zahlungen
anwendbar            abzuwickeln.]

                     [(5)] Bezugnahmen auf Kapital und Zinsen. Bezugnahmen in diesen
                     Anleihebedingungen auf Kapital der Schuldverschreibungen schließen, soweit
                     anwendbar, die folgenden Beträge ein: den Rückzahlungsbetrag der
                     Schuldverschreibungen;    den     vorzeitigen   Rückzahlungsbetrag    der
                     Schuldverschreibungen; [Falls die Emittentin das Wahlrecht hat, die
                                                 115


                   Schuldverschreibungen aus anderen als steuerlichen Gründen vorzeitig
                   zurückzuzahlen, ist Folgendes anwendbar: den Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag (Call)
                   der Schuldverschreibungen;] [Falls der Gläubiger ein Wahlrecht hat, die
                   Schuldverschreibungen vorzeitig zu kündigen, ist Folgendes anwendbar: den
                   Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag (Put) der Schuldverschreibungen;] [Falls die Emittentin
                   das Wahlrecht hat, die Schuldverschreibungen vorzeitig nach Veröffentlichung
                   einer Transaktions-Mitteilung zurückzuzahlen, ist folgendes anwendbar: den
                   Ereignis-Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag der Schuldverschreibungen;] sowie jeden
                   Aufschlag sowie sonstige auf oder in Bezug auf die Schuldverschreibungen zahlbaren
                   Beträge. Bezugnahmen in diesen Anleihebedingungen auf Zinsen auf die
                   Schuldverschreibungen sollen, soweit anwendbar, sämtliche gemäß § 7 zahlbaren
                   zusätzlichen Beträge einschließen.
                   [(6)] Hinterlegung von Kapital und Zinsen. Die Emittentin ist berechtigt, beim
                   Amtsgericht Frankfurt am Main, Bundesrepublik Deutschland, Zins- oder
                   Kapitalbeträge zu hinterlegen, die von den Gläubigern nicht innerhalb von zwölf
                   Monaten nach dem Fälligkeitstag beansprucht worden sind, auch wenn die Gläubiger
                   sich nicht in Annahmeverzug befinden. Soweit eine solche Hinterlegung erfolgt, und
                   auf das Recht der Rücknahme verzichtet wird, erlöschen die diesbezüglichen
                   Ansprüche der Gläubiger gegen die Emittentin.
Im Fall von auf    [(7) (a) Zahlungsverschiebung oder Abwicklung zum USD-Gegenwert.
Renminbi
lautenden          Ungeachtet       jeglicher       entgegenstehender      Bestimmungen       in     diesen
Schuldverschrei-   Anleihebedingungen, falls die Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die
bungen ist         von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantin] nach Treu und Glauben
Folgendes
anwendbar          und in wirtschaftlich angemessener Weise festlegt, dass sie aufgrund Fehlender
                   Konvertierbarkeit, Fehlender Übertragbarkeit oder Illiquidität (jeweils ein "RMB-
                   Währungsereignis") nicht in der Lage ist, Zahlungen in Bezug auf die
                   Schuldverschreibungen [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF
                   Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantie] bei Fälligkeit vollständig in RMB in
                   Hongkong zu leisten, kann die Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die
                   von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantin] [Falls vorzeitige
                   Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin wegen Fehlender Konvertierbarkeit,
                   Fehlender Übertragbarkeit oder Illiquidität anwendbar ist, gilt folgendes:,
                   vorbehaltlich einer vorzeitigen Rückzahlung gemäß § 5([7]),] nach eigenem
                   Ermessen (i) die jeweilige Zahlung auf den zweiten Geschäftstag nach dem Tag, an
                   dem das RMB-Währungsereignis nicht mehr besteht, verschieben, es sei denn, das
                   RMB-Währungsereignis besteht 14 aufeinanderfolgende Tage nach dem jeweiligen
                   Fälligkeitstag fort, oder (ii) jede derartige Zahlung an dem jeweiligen Fälligkeitstag in
                   US-Dollar zum USD-Gegenwert jedes solchen RMB-Betrages leisten. Entscheidet
                   sich die Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance
                   begeben werden: bzw. die Garantin] dafür, die jeweilige Zahlung zu verschieben und
                   das RMB-Währungsereignis besteht für mehr als 14 aufeinanderfolgende Tage nach
                   dem jeweiligen Fälligkeitstag fort, wird die Emittentin [Im Fall von
                   Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
                   Garantin] die jeweilige Zahlung an dem Geschäftstag in US-Dollar zum USD-
                   Gegenwert jedes solchen RMB-Betrages leisten, der auf den 14.
                   aufeinanderfolgenden Tag nach dem jeweiligen Fälligkeitstag folgt. Bei Feststellung,
                   dass ein RMB-Währungsereignis eingetreten ist, wird die Emittentin [Im Fall von
                   Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
                   Garantin] nicht später als 14 Uhr (Hongkong Zeit) am Kurs-Feststellungstag (i) die
                   Berechnungsstelle (wie in § 6 definiert) benachrichtigen und (ii) die Berechnungsstelle
                   anweisen, die Gläubiger gemäß § 13 über den Eintritt eines RMB-
                   Währungsereignisses und die Entscheidung der Emittentin [Im Fall von
                   Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. der
                   Garantin], Zahlungen zu verschieben oder Zahlungen in US-Dollar zu leisten, zu
                   benachrichtigen. In diesem Fall wird die Emittentin [Im Fall von
                   Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
                   Garantin] die Mitteilung an die Gläubiger so früh wie möglich gemäß § 13
                   veranlassen. Im Fall von Zahlungen gemäß diesem § 4[(7)](a) werden die
                   Schuldverschreibungen vom jeweiligen Fälligkeitstag der Schuldverschreibungen
                   (einschließlich) bis zum Tag der tatsächlichen Rückzahlung (einschließlich) nicht
                   verzinst.
                             116



(b)   Zahlungen     in    US-Dollar.    Falls   die Emittentin   [Im  Fall von
Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
Garantin] entscheidet, Zahlungen in US-Dollar zu leisten, werden Zahlungen des
USD-Gegenwertes des jeweiligen RMB-Betrages an die Person(en) gemäß diesem
§ 4 geleistet. Die Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF
Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantin] wird durch Leistung einer jeder
solchen     Zahlung     von      ihrer  jeweiligen  Zahlungspflicht  unter den
Schuldverschreibungen [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF
Finance begeben werden: bzw. unter der Garantie] befreit.
(c) Nichtverfügbarkeit des Kassakurses. Falls (a) die Emittentin [Im Fall von
Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
Garantin] entscheidet, Zahlungen in US-Dollar zu leisten und (b) es nicht möglich ist,
den Kassakurs am Kurs-Feststellungstag einzuholen, kann die Emittentin [Im Fall
von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
Garantin] nach eigenem Ermessen den Kurs-Feststellungstag auf den nächsten
Geschäftstag, an dem der Kassakurs eingeholt werden kann, verschieben, es sei
denn, die Nichtverfügbarkeit des Kassakurses besteht für bis zu 15
aufeinanderfolgende Tage nach dem Tag, der aufgrund der Nichtverfügbarkeit des
Kassakurses der Kurs-Feststellungstag wäre (der "Anfängliche Kurs-
Feststellungstag"), fort. Falls die Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen,
die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantin] entscheidet, den Kurs-
Feststellungstag     zu   verschieben     und     der   Kassakurs    bis   zum    15.
aufeinanderfolgenden Tag nach dem Anfänglichen Kurs-Feststellungstag nicht
verfügbar ist, ist der erste Geschäftstag nach dem 15. aufeinanderfolgenden Tag
nach dem Anfänglichen Kurs-Feststellungstag der Kurs-Feststellungstag. Wird der
Kurs-Feststellungstag verschoben, wird der jeweilige Fälligkeitstag von Zahlungen auf
den zweiten Geschäftstag nach dem Kurs-Feststellungstag verschoben. Die
Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben
werden: bzw. die Garantin] wird ohne unangemessene Verzögerung nachdem sie
festgestellt hat, dass es nicht möglich ist, den Kassakurs am Kurs-Feststellungstag
einzuholen (i) die Berechnungsstelle benachrichtigen und (ii) die Berechnungsstelle
anweisen, die Gläubiger gemäß § 13 über die Nichtverfügbarkeit des Kassakurses
und die Entscheidung der Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von
BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantin], den Kurs-Feststellungstag zu
verschieben oder die Berechnungsstelle anzuweisen, den Kassakurs zu bestimmen,
zu benachrichtigen. In diesem Fall wird die Emittentin [Im Fall von
Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
Garantin] die Mitteilung an die Gläubiger so früh wie möglich gemäß § 13
veranlassen. Im Fall von Zahlungen gemäß diesem § 4[(7)](a) werden die
Schuldverschreibungen vom jeweiligen Fälligkeitstag der Schuldverschreibungen
(einschließlich) bis zum Tag der tatsächlichen Rückzahlung (einschließlich) nicht
verzinst.
(d) Definitionen. Für die Zwecke dieses Absatzes (7) haben die folgenden Begriffe
folgende Bedeutung:
"Staatliche Stelle" bezeichnet alle de facto oder de jure staatlichen Regierungen
(einschließlich der dazu gehörenden Behörden oder Organe), Gerichte,
rechtsprechenden, verwaltungsbehördlichen oder sonstigen staatlichen Stellen und
alle sonstigen (privatrechtlichen oder öffentlich-rechtlichen) Personen (einschließlich
der jeweiligen Zentralbank), die mit Aufsichtsfunktionen über die Finanzmärkte in
Hongkong betraut sind.
"Hong Kong" bezeichnet die Sonderverwaltungszone Hongkong der Volksrepublik
China.
"Illiquidität" bezeichnet die Illiquidität des allgemeinen RMB-Devisenmarkts in
Hongkong, außer in Folge Fehlender Konvertierbarkeit oder Fehlender
Übertragbarkeit, infolgedessen die Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen,
die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantin] (nachdem von ihr alle
Anstrengungen unternommen wurden) nicht die ausreichende Menge an RMB zur
vollständigen Erfüllung ihrer Zahlungsverpflichtungen in Bezug auf die
Schuldverschreibungen [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF
Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantie] erhalten kann.
                            117



"Fehlende Konvertierbarkeit" bezeichnet den Eintritt eines Ereignisses, das die
Umwandlung eines fälligen Betrags in Bezug auf die Schuldverschreibungen [Im Fall
von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
Garantie] in RMB am allgemeinen RMB-Devisenmarkt in Hongkong unmöglich, oder,
nachdem alle Anstrengungen unternommen wurden, undurchführbar macht, sofern
diese Unmöglichkeit oder Undurchführbarkeit ausschließlich auf eine Nichteinhaltung
von Gesetzen, Verordnungen oder Vorschriften einer Staatlichen Stelle seitens der
Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben
werden: bzw. der Garantin] zurückzuführen ist (es sei denn, die betreffenden
Gesetze, Verordnungen oder Vorschriften werden nach dem Begebungstag der
Schuldverschreibungen verabschiedet bzw. erlassen und ihre Einhaltung ist der
Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben
werden: bzw. der Garantin] aufgrund eines außerhalb ihres Einflussbereichs
liegenden Ereignisses nicht möglich oder, nachdem von ihr alle Anstrengungen
unternommen wurden, undurchführbar).
"Fehlende Übertragbarkeit" bezeichnet den Eintritt eines Ereignisses, das eine
Überweisung von RMB zwischen Konten innerhalb Hongkongs oder von einem Konto
in Hongkong auf ein Konto außerhalb Hongkongs unmöglich oder, nachdem alle
Anstrengungen unternommen wurden, undurchführbar macht, sofern diese
Unmöglichkeit oder Undurchführbarkeit ausschließlich auf eine Nichteinhaltung von
Gesetzen, Verordnungen oder Vorschriften einer Staatlichen Stelle seitens der
Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben
werden: bzw. der Garantin] zurückzuführen ist (es sei denn, die betreffenden
Gesetze, Verordnungen oder Vorschriften werden nach dem Begebungstag der
Schuldverschreibungen verabschiedet bzw. erlassen und ihre Einhaltung ist der
Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben
werden: bzw. der Garantin] aufgrund eines außerhalb ihres Einflussbereichs
liegenden Ereignisses nicht möglich oder, nachdem von ihr alle Anstrengungen
unternommen wurden, undurchführbar).
"Kurs-Feststellungstag" bezeichnet den Tag, der zwei Geschäftstage vor dem
Fälligkeitstag der jeweiligen Zahlung gemäß dieser Anleihebedingungen liegt,
vorbehaltlich einer Anpassung gemäß Absatz (7)(c) oben.
"Kassakurs" bezeichnet das arithmetische Mittel zwischen Geld- und Briefkurs
zwischen US-Dollar und RMB für den Kauf von US-Dollar mit Renminbi auf dem
außerbörslichen Renminbi Devisenmarkt in Hongkong mit Abwicklung nach zwei
Geschäftstagen zu dem von der Berechnungsstelle am Kurs-Feststellungstag um ca.
11.00 Uhr (Hongkong Zeit), unter der Annahme einer tatsächlichen Abwicklung, unter
Heranziehung der auf der Bildschirmseite TRADCNY3 von Reuters unter der Spalte
USD/CNH festgelegten Kurse, oder, sofern solche Kurse nicht zur Verfügung stehen,
unter der Annahme eines synthetischen Geschäfts, unter Heranziehung der
Bildschirmseite TRADNDF von Reuters oder der jeweiligen Nachfolgeseiten. Sofern
keiner dieser Kurse verfügbar ist, wird die Berechnungsstelle den Kassakurs um ca.
11.00 Uhr (Hongkong Zeit) am Kurs-Feststellungstag als aktuellsten verfügbaren
offiziellen US-Dollar/RMB Kurs für Abwicklungen am übernächsten Geschäftstag, wie
vom staatlichen Devisenamt der Volksrepublik China (State Administration of Foreign
Exchange of the People's Republic of China) veröffentlicht, der auf der
Bildschirmseite CNY=SAEC von Reuters veröffentlicht wird, bestimmen. Verweise auf
Bildschirmseiten von Reuters beziehen sich auf von Reuters so bezeichnete Monitor
Money Rates Service Seiten (oder einen an dessen Stelle tretenden Dienst) oder auf
andere Seiten, die diese Seiten zum Zwecke der Darstellung eines vergleichbaren
Devisenwechselkurses gegebenenfalls ersetzen.
"USD-Gegenwert" eines RMB-Betrags bezeichnet den in US-Dollar anhand des
Kassakurses für den jeweiligen Kurs-Feststellungstag umgewandelten jeweiligen
RMB-Betrag, wie von der Berechnungsstelle an dem Kurs-Feststellungstag bestimmt
und der Emittentin [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance
begeben werden: bzw. der Garantin] unverzüglich mitgeteilt.
"Geschäftstag" bezeichnet für die Zwecke dieses § 4 Absatz (7) einen Tag (außer
einem Samstag oder Sonntag), an dem Geschäftsbanken für den allgemeinen
Geschäftsverkehr (einschließlich Devisengeschäften) in [Hongkong, Peking] geöffnet
sind.
                                                118



                   (e) Bezugnahmen. Bezugnahmen auf "RMB" bezeichnen die gesetzliche Währung
                   der Volksrepublik China, wobei dieser Begriff Hongkong, die Sonderverwaltungszone
                   Macao der Volksrepublik China und Taiwan ausschließt.
                   (f) Verbindlichkeit der Festsetzungen. Alle Mitteilungen, Auffassungen,
                   Feststellungen,     Bescheinigungen,       Berechnungen,       Kursnotierungen  und
                   Entscheidungen, die für die Zwecke dieser Bestimmungen von der Berechnungsstelle
                   abgegeben, zum Ausdruck gebracht, vorgenommen oder eingeholt werden, sind
                   (außer in Fällen von Vorsatz, Arglist oder offenkundigen Fehlern) für die Emittentin
                   [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden:
                   bzw. die Garantin], die Erfüllungsgehilfen und alle Gläubiger verbindlich.]

                                                           §5
                                                      RÜCKZAHLUNG
                   (1) Rückzahlung bei Endfälligkeit. Soweit nicht zuvor bereits ganz oder teilweise
                   zurückgezahlt oder angekauft und entwertet [Im Fall von auf Renminbi lautenden
                   Schuldverschreibungen ist Folgendes anwendbar: bzw. vorbehaltlich einer
                   Zahlungsverschiebung gemäß § 4 Absatz (7)], werden die Schuldverschreibungen zu
                   ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag am [Fälligkeitstag] (der "Fälligkeitstag") zurückgezahlt.
                   Der "Rückzahlungsbetrag" in Bezug auf jede Schuldverschreibung entspricht dem
                   Nennbetrag der Schuldverschreibung.
Im Fall von        [(2) Vorzeitige Rückzahlung aus steuerlichen Gründen. Die Schuldverschreibungen
Schuldverschrei-   können insgesamt, jedoch nicht teilweise, nach Wahl der Emittentin mit einer
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   Kündigungsfrist von nicht weniger als 30 Tagen und nicht mehr als 60 Tagen
werden, ist        gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent und gemäß § 13 gegenüber den Gläubigern vorzeitig
Folgendes          gekündigt und zu ihrem vorzeitigen Rückzahlungsbetrag (wie nachstehend definiert)
anwendbar          zuzüglich bis zum für die Rückzahlung festgesetzten Tag aufgelaufener Zinsen
                   zurückgezahlt werden, falls die Emittentin als Folge einer Änderung oder Ergänzung
                   der Steuer- oder Abgabengesetze und -vorschriften der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
                   oder deren politischen Untergliederungen oder Steuerbehörden oder als Folge einer
                   Änderung oder Ergänzung der Anwendung oder der offiziellen Auslegung dieser
                   Gesetze und Vorschriften (vorausgesetzt, diese Änderung oder Ergänzung wird am
                   oder nach dem Tag, an dem die letzte Tranche dieser Serie von
                   Schuldverschreibungen      begeben      wird,    wirksam)    am     nächstfolgenden
                   Zinszahlungstag (wie in § 3 Absatz (1) definiert) zur Zahlung von zusätzlichen
                   Beträgen (wie in § 7 dieser Bedingungen definiert) verpflichtet sein wird und diese
                   Verpflichtung nicht durch das Ergreifen vernünftiger, der Emittentin zur Verfügung
                   stehender Maßnahmen vermieden werden kann.
                   Eine solche Kündigung darf allerdings nicht (i) früher als 90 Tage vor dem frühest
                   möglichen Termin erfolgen, an dem die Emittentin verpflichtet wäre, solche
                   zusätzlichen Beträge zu zahlen, falls eine Zahlung auf die Schuldverschreibungen
                   dann fällig sein würde, oder (ii) erfolgen, wenn zu dem Zeitpunkt, in dem die
                   Kündigungsmitteilung erfolgt, die Verpflichtung zur Zahlung von zusätzlichen
                   Beträgen nicht mehr wirksam ist.]

Im Fall von        [(2) Vorzeitige Rückzahlung aus steuerlichen Gründen. Die Schuldverschreibungen
Schuldverschrei-   können insgesamt, jedoch nicht teilweise, nach Wahl der Emittentin mit einer
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   Kündigungsfrist von nicht weniger als 30 Tagen und nicht mehr als 60 Tagen
begeben werden,    gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent und gemäß § 13 gegenüber den Gläubigern vorzeitig
ist Folgendes      gekündigt und zu ihrem vorzeitigen Rückzahlungsbetrag (wie nachstehend definiert)
anwendbar          zuzüglich bis zum für die Rückzahlung festgesetzten Tag aufgelaufener Zinsen
                   zurückgezahlt werden, falls die Emittentin oder die Garantin als Folge einer Änderung
                   oder Ergänzung der Steuer- oder Abgabengesetze und -vorschriften der
                   Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder der Niederlande oder deren politischen
                   Untergliederungen oder Steuerbehörden oder als Folge einer Änderung oder
                   Ergänzung der Anwendung oder der offiziellen Auslegung dieser Gesetze und
                   Vorschriften (vorausgesetzt, diese Änderung oder Ergänzung wird am oder nach dem
                   Tag, an dem die letzte Tranche dieser Serie von Schuldverschreibungen begeben
                   wird, wirksam) am nächstfolgenden Zinszahlungstag (wie in § 3 Absatz (1) definiert)
                   zur Zahlung von zusätzlichen Beträgen (wie in § 7 dieser Bedingungen definiert)
                   verpflichtet sein wird und diese Verpflichtung nicht durch das Ergreifen vernünftiger,
                                                  119


                     der Emittentin oder der Garantin zur Verfügung stehender Maßnahmen vermieden
                     werden kann.
                     Eine solche Kündigung darf allerdings nicht (i) früher als 90 Tage vor dem frühest
                     möglichen Termin erfolgen, an dem die Emittentin oder die Garantin verpflichtet wäre,
                     solche zusätzlichen Beträge zu zahlen, falls eine Zahlung auf die
                     Schuldverschreibungen dann fällig sein würde, oder (ii) erfolgen, wenn zu dem
                     Zeitpunkt, in dem die Kündigungsmitteilung erfolgt, die Verpflichtung zur Zahlung von
                     zusätzlichen Beträgen nicht mehr wirksam ist.]
                     Eine solche Kündigung hat gemäß § 13 zu erfolgen. Sie ist unwiderruflich, muss den
                     für die Rückzahlung festgelegten Termin nennen und eine zusammenfassende
                     Erklärung enthalten, welche die das Rückzahlungsrecht der Emittentin begründenden
                     Umständen darlegt.
Falls die            [(3) Kontrollwechsel. Tritt ein Kontrollwechsel ein und kommt es innerhalb des
Gläubiger das        Kontrollwechselzeitraums zu einer Absenkung des Ratings auf Grund des
Wahlrecht haben,
die Schuldver-
                     Kontrollwechsels (zusammen, ein "Rückzahlungsereignis"), hat jeder Gläubiger das
schreibungen         Recht (sofern nicht die Emittentin, bevor die nachstehend beschriebene
vorzeitig aufgrund   Rückzahlungsmitteilung gemacht wird, die Rückzahlung der Schuldverschreibungen
eines                nach § 5 Absatz (2) angezeigt hat), die Rückzahlung seiner Schuldverschreibungen
Kontrollwechsels     durch die Emittentin zum Nennbetrag, zuzüglich aufgelaufener Zinsen bis zum
zu kündigen, ist
                     Rückzahlungstag (ausschließlich), zu verlangen.
Folgendes
anwendbar            Für Zwecke dieses Wahlrechts:
                     Bedeutet "Ratingagentur" jede Ratingagentur von S&P Global Ratings Europe
                     Limited ("S&P"), Moody's Deutschland GmbH ("Moody's") und Fitch Ratings Ireland
                     Limited ("Fitch") oder eine ihrer jeweiligen Nachfolgegesellschaften oder jede andere
                     von BASF von Zeit zu Zeit bestimmte Ratingagentur vergleichbaren internationalen
                     Ansehens;
                     Gilt eine "Absenkung des Ratings" in Bezug auf einen Kontrollwechsel als
                     eingetreten, wenn innerhalb des Kontrollwechselzeitraums ein vorher für BASF oder
                     die Schuldverschreibungen vergebenes Rating einer Ratingagentur (i) zurückgezogen
                     oder (ii) von einem Investment Grade Rating (BBB- von S&P und Fitch/Baa3 von
                     Moody's oder jeweils gleichwertig, oder besser) in ein non-Investment Grade Rating
                     (BB+ von S&P und Fitch/Ba1 von Moody's oder jeweils gleichwertig, oder schlechter)
                     geändert wird;
                     Gilt ein "Kontrollwechsel" jedes Mal als eingetreten, wenn eine Person oder mehrere
                     Personen (die "relevante(n) Person(en)"), die im Sinne von § 30 Absatz 2 des
                     Wertpapiererwerbs- und Übernahmegesetzes (WpÜG) abgestimmt handeln, oder ein
                     oder mehrere Dritte(r), die im Auftrag der relevanten Person(en) handeln, zu
                     irgendeiner Zeit mittelbar oder unmittelbar (unabhängig davon, ob der Vorstand oder
                     der Aufsichtsrat der BASF seine Zustimmung erteilt hat) eine solche Anzahl von
                     Aktien der BASF hält bzw. halten oder erworben hat bzw. haben, auf die mehr als
                     50% der Stimmrechte entfallen;
                     Ist der "Kontrollwechselzeitraum" der Zeitraum, der 120 Tage nach dem Eintritt
                     eines Kontrollwechsels endet; und
                     Ist der "Rückzahlungstag" der fünfzehnte Tag nach dem letzten Tag des
                     Ausübungszeitraums.
                     Sofort nachdem die Emittentin von einem Rückzahlungsereignis Kenntnis erlangt,
                     wird sie den Gläubigern gemäß § 13 Mitteilung vom Rückzahlungsereignis machen
                     (eine "Rückzahlungsmitteilung"), in der die Umstände des Rückzahlungsereignisses
                     sowie das Verfahren für die Ausübung des in diesem § 5 Absatz (3) genannten
                     Wahlrechts angegeben sind.
                     Um dieses Wahlrecht auszuüben, hat der Gläubiger innerhalb eines Zeitraums von 45
                     Tagen       nachdem     die   Rückzahlungsmitteilung      veröffentlicht  ist    (der
                     "Ausübungszeitraum"), an die bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle des Fiscal Agent eine
                     Mitteilung zur vorzeitigen Rückzahlung in Textform (z.B. eMail oder Fax) oder in
                     schriftlicher   Form     ("Ausübungserklärung")       zu    schicken.    Falls    die
                     Ausübungserklärung nach 17:00 Uhr Frankfurt am Main Zeit am 45. Tag nach
                     Veröffentlichung der Rückzahlungsmitteilung eingeht, ist das Wahlrecht nicht wirksam
                     ausgeübt. Die Ausübungserklärung hat anzugeben: (i) den gesamten Nennbetrag der
                                                   120


                      Schuldverschreibungen, für die das Wahlrecht ausgeübt wird und (ii) die
                      Wertpapierkennnummern dieser Schuldverschreibungen (soweit vergeben). Für die
                      Ausübungserklärung kann ein Formblatt, wie es bei den bezeichneten
                      Geschäftsstellen des Fiscal Agent in deutscher und englischer Sprache erhältlich ist
                      und das weitere Hinweise enthält, verwendet werden. Die Ausübung des Wahlrechts
                      kann nicht widerrufen werden. Die Rückzahlung der Schuldverschreibungen, für
                      welche das Wahlrecht ausgeübt worden ist, erfolgt nur gegen Lieferung der
                      Schuldverschreibungen an die Emittentin oder deren Order.]


Falls die             [[(4)] Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin.
Emittentin das
Wahlrecht hat, die    (a) Die Emittentin kann, nachdem sie gemäß Absatz (b) gekündigt hat, die
Schuldver-                Schuldverschreibungen insgesamt oder teilweise am/an den Wahl-
schreibungen              Rückzahlungstag(en) (Call) oder jederzeit danach bis zum jeweils nachfolgenden
vorzeitig zu
festgelegten              Wahl-Rückzahlungstag        (ausschließlich)      zum/zu       den       Wahl-
Wahlrück-                 Rückzahlungsbetrag/beträgen (Call), wie nachstehend angegeben, nebst
zahlungsbeträgen          etwaigen bis zum jeweiligen Rückzahlungstag (ausschließlich) aufgelaufenen
(Call) zurück-            Zinsen zurückzahlen.
zuzahlen, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar

                          Wahl-Rückzahlungstag(e) (Call)         Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag/beträge (Call)
                              [Wahl-Rückzahlungstag(e)]            [Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag/beträge]
                          [                               ]           [                             ]
                          [                               ]           [                             ]
                         [Falls der Gläubiger ein Wahlrecht hat, die Schuldverschreibungen vorzeitig
                         zu kündigen, ist Folgendes anwendbar: Der Emittentin steht dieses Wahlrecht
                         nicht in Bezug auf eine Schuldverschreibung zu, deren Rückzahlung bereits der
                         Gläubiger in Ausübung seines Wahlrechts nach Absatz [(6)] dieses § 5 verlangt
                         hat.]
                      (b) Die Kündigung ist den Gläubigern der Schuldverschreibungen durch die Emittentin
                          gemäß § 13 bekannt zu geben. Sie beinhaltet die folgenden Angaben:
                         (i) die zurückzuzahlende Serie von Schuldverschreibungen;
                         (ii) eine Erklärung, ob diese Serie ganz oder teilweise zurückgezahlt wird und im
                              letzteren   Fall    den    Gesamtnennbetrag        der   zurückzuzahlenden
                              Schuldverschreibungen;
                         (iii) den Rückzahlungstag, der nicht weniger als 30 Tage und nicht mehr als 60
                               Tage nach dem Tag der Kündigung durch die Emittentin gegenüber den
                               Gläubigern liegen darf; und
                         (iv) den Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag (Call), zu dem die Schuldverschreibungen
                              zurückgezahlt werden.
                      (c) Wenn die Schuldverschreibungen nur teilweise zurückgezahlt werden, werden die
                          zurückzuzahlenden Schuldverschreibungen in Übereinstimmung mit den Regeln
                          des     betreffenden   Clearing    Systems       ausgewählt.    [Falls    die
                          Schuldverschreibungen in Form einer NGN begeben werden, ist Folgendes
                          anwendbar: Die teilweise Rückzahlung wird in den Registern von CBL und
                          Euroclear nach deren Ermessen entweder als Pool-Faktor oder als Reduzierung
                          des Gesamtnennbetrags wiedergegeben.]]

Falls die             [[(5)] Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin.
Emittentin das
Wahlrecht hat, die    (a) Die Emittentin kann, nachdem sie gemäß Absatz (b) gekündigt hat, die
Schuldver-                Schuldverschreibungen jederzeit insgesamt oder teilweise (jeweils ein
schreibungen              "Vorzeitiger     Wahl-Rückzahlungstag           (Call)")    zum      vorzeitigen
vorzeitig zum
vorzeitigen               Rückzahlungsbetrag nebst etwaigen bis zum jeweiligen Vorzeitigen Wahl-
Rückzahlungs-             Rückzahlungstag (Call) (ausschließlich) aufgelaufenen Zinsen zurückzahlen.
betrag
zurückzuzahlen, ist
                                                   121


Folgendes
anwendbar

                         [Falls der Gläubiger ein Wahlrecht hat, die Schuldverschreibungen vorzeitig
                         zu kündigen, ist Folgendes anwendbar: Der Emittentin steht dieses Wahlrecht
                         nicht in Bezug auf eine Schuldverschreibung zu, deren Rückzahlung bereits der
                         Gläubiger in Ausübung seines Wahlrechts nach Absatz [(6)] dieses § 5 verlangt
                         hat.]
                      (b) Die Kündigung ist den Gläubigern der Schuldverschreibungen durch die Emittentin
                          gemäß § 13 bekannt zu geben. Sie beinhaltet die folgenden Angaben:
                         (i) die zurückzuzahlende Serie von Schuldverschreibungen;
                         (ii) eine Erklärung, ob diese Serie ganz oder teilweise zurückgezahlt wird und im
                              letzteren   Fall    den    Gesamtnennbetrag        der    zurückzuzahlenden
                              Schuldverschreibungen; und
                         (iii) den Vorzeitigen Wahl-Rückzahlungstag (Call), der nicht weniger als 30 Tage
                               und nicht mehr als 60 Tage nach dem Tag der Kündigung durch die Emittentin
                               gegenüber den Gläubigern liegen darf.
                      (c) Wenn die Schuldverschreibungen nur teilweise zurückgezahlt werden, werden die
                          zurückzuzahlenden Schuldverschreibungen in Übereinstimmung mit den Regeln
                          des     betreffenden   Clearing    Systems       ausgewählt.    [Falls    die
                          Schuldverschreibungen in Form einer NGN begeben werden, ist Folgendes
                          anwendbar: Die teilweise Rückzahlung wird in den Registern von CBL und
                          Euroclear nach deren Ermessen entweder als Pool-Faktor oder als Reduzierung
                          des Gesamtnennbetrags wiedergegeben.]]

Falls der Gläubiger   [[(6)] Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl des Gläubigers.
ein Wahlrecht hat,
die Schuldver-        (a) Die Emittentin hat eine Schuldverschreibung nach Ausübung des entsprechenden
schreibungen              Wahlrechts durch den Gläubiger am/an den Wahl-Rückzahlungstag(en) (Put)
vorzeitig zu              zum/zu den Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag/beträgen (Put), wie nachstehend
festgelegtem/n
Wahlrückzahlungs-         angegeben nebst etwaigen bis zum Wahl-Rückzahlungstag (Put) (ausschließlich)
betrag/-beträgen          aufgelaufener Zinsen zurückzuzahlen.
(Put) zu kündigen,
ist Folgendes
anwendbar

                           Wahl-Rückzahlungstag(e) (Put)          Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag/beträge (Put)
                              [Wahl-Rückzahlungstag(e)]            [Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag/beträge]
                          [                               ]           [                              ]
                          [                               ]           [                              ]
                         Dem Gläubiger steht dieses Wahlrecht nicht in Bezug auf eine
                         Schuldverschreibung zu, deren Rückzahlung die Emittentin zuvor in Ausübung
                         eines ihrer Wahlrechte nach diesem § 5 verlangt hat.
                      (b) Um dieses Wahlrecht auszuüben, hat der Gläubiger nicht weniger als 30 Tage und
                          nicht mehr als 60 Tage vor dem Wahl-Rückzahlungstag (Put), an dem die
                          Rückzahlung gemäß der Ausübungserklärung (wie nachstehend definiert) erfolgen
                          soll, an die bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle des Fiscal Agent eine Mitteilung zur
                          vorzeitigen Rückzahlung in Textform (z.B. eMail oder Fax) oder in schriftlicher
                          Form ("Ausübungserklärung") zu schicken. Falls die Ausübungserklärung nach
                          17:00 Uhr Frankfurt am Main Zeit am 30. Tag vor dem Wahl-Rückzahlungstag (Put)
                          eingeht, ist das Wahlrecht nicht wirksam ausgeübt. Die Ausübungserklärung hat
                          anzugeben: (i) den gesamten Nennbetrag der Schuldverschreibungen, für die das
                          Wahlrecht ausgeübt wird und (ii) die Wertpapierkennnummern dieser
                          Schuldverschreibungen (soweit vergeben). Für die Ausübungserklärung kann ein
                          Formblatt, wie es bei den bezeichneten Geschäftsstellen des Fiscal Agent in
                          deutscher und englischer Sprache erhältlich ist und das weitere Hinweise enthält,
                          verwendet werden. Die Ausübung des Wahlrechts kann nicht widerrufen werden.
                          Die Rückzahlung der Schuldverschreibungen, für welche das Wahlrecht ausgeübt
                          worden ist, erfolgt nur gegen Lieferung der Schuldverschreibungen an die
                          Emittentin oder deren Order.]
                                                       122




Im Fall von              [[(7)] Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin wegen Fehlender
Schuldverschrei-         Konvertierbarkeit, Fehlender Übertragbarkeit oder Illiquidität. Falls die Emittentin [Im
bungen, deren
festgelegte
                         Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw.
Währung Renminbi         die Garantin] aufgrund Fehlender Konvertierbarkeit, Fehlender Übertragbarkeit oder
ist und falls die        Illiquidität (wie jeweils in § 4 Absatz 7 definiert) nicht in der Lage ist, Zahlungen in
Emittentin das           Bezug auf die Schuldverschreibungen [Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die
Recht zur                von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die Garantie] bei Fälligkeit vollständig in
vorzeitigen
                         RMB in Hongkong zu leisten, kann die Emittentin [Im Fall von
Rückzahlung
wegen Fehlender          Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden: bzw. die
Konvertierbarkeit,       Garantin] die Schuldverschreibungen insgesamt, jedoch nicht teilweise, mit einer
Fehlender                Kündigungsfrist von nicht weniger als 10 und nicht mehr als 30 Tagen unwiderruflich
Übertragbarkeit          gegenüber den Gläubigern gemäß § 13 vorzeitig kündigen und zum USD-Gegenwert
oder Illiquidität hat,   (wie in § 4 Absatz 7 definiert) des Vorzeitigen Rückzahlungsbetrages zuzüglich des
ist Folgendes
anwendbar                USD-Gegenwerts etwaiger bis zum für die Rückzahlung festgesetzten Tag
                         (ausschliesslich) aufgelaufener Zinsen zurückzahlen.]

Falls    vorzeitige      [[(8)] Rückkauf; Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin bei geringem
Rückzahlung     bei
                         ausstehendem Nennbetrag. Die Emittentin kann jederzeit Schuldverschreibungen im
geringem
ausstehenden             Markt oder anderweitig zu jedem beliebigen Preis kaufen (was zur Vermeidung von
Nennbetrag               Zweifeln eine (vorzeitige) Rückzahlung, wie in diesen Anleihebedingungen festgelegt,
anwendbar ist, ist       ausschließt). Derartig erworbene Schuldverschreibungen können entwertet, gehalten
folgendes
anwendbar
                         oder wieder veräußert werden. Falls die Emittentin Schuldverschreibungen in einem
                         Gesamtnennbetrag von 75% oder mehr des ursprünglich begebenen
                         Gesamtnennbetrages der Schuldverschreibungen erworben hat, und der
                         Gesamtnennbetrag der Schuldverschreibungen in der Globalurkunde um diesen
                         Prozentsatz reduziert wurde, kann die Emittentin die verbleibenden
                         Schuldverschreibungen (insgesamt, jedoch nicht teilweise) mit einer Kündigungsfrist
                         von nicht weniger als 30 und nicht mehr als 60 Tagen unwiderruflich gegenüber den
                         Gläubigern gemäß § 13 kündigen und zum Rückzahlungsbetrag nebst etwaiger bis
                         zum Rückzahlungstag (ausschließlich) aufgelaufener Zinsen zurückzahlen.]

Falls die Emittentin     [[(9)] Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin nach Veröffentlichung einer
das Wahlrecht hat,       Transaktions-Mitteilung.
die
Schuldverschrei-         (a) Die Emittentin kann, nachdem sie gemäß Absatz (b) mittels einer Transaktions-
bungen vorzeitig             Mitteilung gekündigt hat, die Schuldverschreibungen insgesamt oder teilweise am
nach
Veröffentlichung             jeweiligen Rückzahlungstag zum Ereignis-Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag nebst
einer Transaktions-          etwaigen bis zum jeweiligen Rückzahlungstag (ausschließlich) aufgelaufener
Mitteilung zum               Zinsen     zurückzahlen.     "Ereignis-Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag"      bezeichnet
Ereignis-Wahlrück-           [Ereignis-Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag].
zahlungsbetrag
zurückzuzahlen, ist
folgendes
anwendbar

                            "Transaktions-Mitteilung"    bezeichnet       eine      Mitteilung,   dass    das
                            Transaktionsauslösende Ereignis eingetreten ist. Die Transaktions-Mitteilung kann
                            nur innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach dem Eintreten des Transaktionsauslösenden
                            Ereignisses und nur, wenn das Transaktionsauslösende Ereignis innerhalb der
                            Transaktionsauslösenden Ereignisfrist eingetreten ist, zugestellt werden.
                            "Transaktionsauslösende Ereignisfrist" bezeichnet             den   Zeitraum    vom
                            [Begebungstag] bis zum [Datum Ende des Zeitraums].
                            "Transaktion" bezeichnet [Beschreibung der Transaktion bezüglich derer die
                            Schuldverschreibungen zu Finanzierungszwecken begeben wurden oder in
                            Bezug auf die das Eintreten eines Transaktionsauslösenden Ereignisses das
                            Kündigungsrecht auslöst].
                            "Transaktionsauslösendes Ereignis" bedeutet [die Transaktion wurde vor ihrem
                            Abschluss beendet oder die Transaktion wird aus irgendeinem anderen Grund
                            nicht abgewickelt oder die Emittentin hat öffentlich erklärt, dass sie nicht länger
                            beabsichtigt, die Transaktion zu verfolgen] [Beschreibung des Ereignisses im
                            Zusammenhang mit der Transaktion, dessen Eintritt ein Kündigungsrecht
                                                   123


                         auslöst]
                         [Falls der Gläubiger ein Wahlrecht hat, die Schuldverschreibungen vorzeitig
                         zu kündigen, ist folgendes anwendbar: Der Emittentin steht dieses Wahlrecht
                         nicht in Bezug auf eine Schuldverschreibung zu, deren Rückzahlung bereits der
                         Gläubiger in Ausübung seines Wahlrechts nach Absatz [(6)] dieses § 5 verlangt
                         hat.]
                      (b) Die Transaktions-Mitteilung ist den Gläubigern der Schuldverschreibungen durch
                          die Emittentin gemäß § 13 bekanntzugeben. Sie beinhaltet die folgenden
                          Angaben:
                         (i) die zurückzuzahlende Serie von Schuldverschreibungen;
                         (ii) eine Erklärung, ob diese Serie ganz oder teilweise zurückgezahlt wird und im
                         letzteren      Fall    den     Gesamtnennbetrag        der    zurückzuzahlenden
                         Schuldverschreibungen; und
                         (iii) den jeweiligen Rückzahlungstag, der nicht weniger als 30 Tage und nicht mehr
                         als 60 Tage nach dem Tag der Kündigung durch die Emittentin gegenüber den
                         Gläubigern liegen darf.
                      (c) Wenn die Schuldverschreibungen nur teilweise zurückgezahlt werden, werden die
                          zurückzuzahlenden Schuldverschreibungen in Übereinstimmung mit den Regeln
                          des     betreffenden   Clearing    Systems       ausgewählt.    [Falls    die
                          Schuldverschreibungen in Form einer NGN begeben werden, ist folgendes
                          anwendbar: Die teilweise Rückzahlung wird in den Registern von CBL und
                          Euroclear nach deren Ermessen entweder als Pool-Faktor oder als Reduzierung
                          des Gesamtnennbetrags wiedergegeben.]]

                      [(10)] Vorzeitiger Rückzahlungsbetrag. [(a)] Für die Zwecke des Absatzes (2) [und
                      [(7)]] dieses § 5, entspricht der vorzeitige Rückzahlungsbetrag einer
                      Schuldverschreibung dem Rückzahlungsbetrag.
Falls die             [(b) Für die Zwecke des Absatzes [(5)] dieses § 5 entspricht der vorzeitige
Emittentin das        Rückzahlungsbetrag einer Schuldverschreibung (i) dem Rückzahlungsbetrag oder (ii),
Wahlrecht hat, die
Schuldver-
                      falls höher, dem abgezinsten Marktwert der Schuldverschreibung. Der abgezinste
schreibungen          Marktwert einer Schuldverschreibung wird von der Berechnungsstelle errechnet und
vorzeitig zum         entspricht dem abgezinsten Wert der Summe des Nennbetrages der
vorzeitigen           Schuldverschreibung und der verbleibenden Zinszahlungen bis zum [Fälligkeitstag].
Rückzahlungs-         Der abgezinste Wert wird von der Berechnungsstelle errechnet, indem der
betrag
zurückzuzahlen, ist
                      Nennbetrag der Schuldverschreibung und die verbleibenden Zinszahlungen bis zum
Folgendes             [Fälligkeitstag] auf einer jährlichen Basis, bei Annahme eines 365-Tage Jahres bzw.
anwendbar             eines 366-Tages Jahres und der tatsächlichen Anzahl von Tagen, die einem solchen
                      Jahr abgelaufen sind, unter Anwendung der Vergleichbaren Benchmark Rendite
                      zuzüglich [Prozentsatz]% abgezinst werden. Die "Vergleichbare Benchmark
                      Rendite" bezeichnet die am Rückzahlungs-Berechnungstag bestehende Rendite der
                      entsprechenden [Euro-Referenz-Anleihe der Bundesrepublik Deutschland] [durch HM
                      Treasury begebenen Sterling-Referenzanleihe des Vereinigten Königreichs]
                      [Schweizer Franken-Referenz-Bundesanleihe der Schweizerischen Eidgenossen-
                      schaft] [Referenz-U.S. Staatsanleihe (US Treasury debt security) in U.S. Dollar] mit
                      einer Laufzeit, die mit der verbleibenden Laufzeit der Schuldverschreibung bis zum
                      [Fälligkeitstag] vergleichbar ist, und die im Zeitpunkt der Auswahlentscheidung und
                      entsprechend der üblichen Finanzmarktpraxis zur Preisbestimmung bei
                      Neuemissionen von Unternehmensanleihen mit einer bis zum [Fälligkeitstag] der
                      Schuldverschreibung      vergleichbaren     Laufzeit   verwendet   werden    würde.
                      "Rückzahlungs-Berechnungstag" ist der dritte Zahltag vor dem jeweiligen Wahl-
                      Rückzahlungstag (Call).]

                                                          §6
                                  DER FISCAL AGENT[, ] [UND] DIE ZAHLSTELLE [UND DIE
                                               BERECHNUNGSSTELLE]
                      (1) Bestellung; bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle. Der anfänglich bestellte Fiscal Agent [,]
                      [und] die anfänglich bestellte Zahlstelle [und die anfänglich bestellte
                      Berechnungsstelle] und deren bezeichnete Geschäftsstellen lauten wie folgt:
                                                    124



Folgendes ist        [Fiscal Agent           Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
außer für eine       und Zahlstelle:         Trust & Agency Services
Dauerglobal-
urkunde, die von
                                             Taunusanlage 12
oder für CDS                                 60325 Frankfurt am Main
verwahrt wird,                               Bundesrepublik Deutschland]
anwendbar


Im Fall einer        [Fiscal Agent und       [Name und bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle des/der
Dauerglobal-         Zahlstelle:             Kanadischen Fiscal Agent und Zahlstelle]]
urkunde, die von
oder für CDS
verwahrt wird, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Falls die            [Berechnungsstelle:     [Name und bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle]]
Emittentin das
Wahlrecht hat, die
Schuldver-
schreibungen
vorzeitig zum
vorzeitigen
Rückzahlungs-
betrag
zurückzuzahlen
oder im Fall von
Schuldverschrei-
bungen, deren
festgelegte
Währung Renminbi
ist, ist Folgendes
anwendbar

                     Der Fiscal Agent [,] [und] die Zahlstelle [und die Berechnungsstelle] behalten sich das
                     Recht vor, jederzeit ihre bezeichnete[n] Geschäftsstelle[n] durch eine andere
                     bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle in demselben Land zu ersetzen.
                     (2) Änderung der Bestellung oder Abberufung. Die Emittentin behält sich das Recht
                     vor, jederzeit die Bestellung des Fiscal Agents oder einer Zahlstelle [oder der
                     Berechnungsstelle] zu ändern oder zu beenden und einen anderen Fiscal Agent oder
                     zusätzliche oder andere Zahlstellen [oder eine andere Berechnungsstelle] zu
                     bestellen. Die Emittentin wird zu jedem Zeitpunkt [(i)] einen Fiscal Agent unterhalten
                     [Im Fall von Zahlungen in U.S. Dollar ist Folgendes anwendbar:, (ii) falls
                     Zahlungen bei den oder durch die Geschäftsstellen aller Zahlstellen außerhalb der
                     Vereinigten Staaten (wie unten definiert) aufgrund der Einführung von
                     Devisenbeschränkungen oder ähnlichen Beschränkungen hinsichtlich der
                     vollständigen Zahlung oder des Empfangs der entsprechenden Beträge in U.S. Dollar
                     widerrechtlich oder tatsächlich ausgeschlossen werden, eine Zahlstelle mit
                     bezeichneter Geschäftsstelle in New York City unterhalten] [Im Fall einer
                     Dauerglobalurkunde, die von oder für CDS verwahrt wird, ist Folgendes
                     anwendbar: , (iii) eine(n) kanadische(n) Fiscal Agent und eine Zahlstelle mit
                     bezeichneter Geschäftsstelle in Toronto, Ontario unterhalten] [Falls eine
                     Berechnungsstelle bestellt werden soll, ist Folgendes anwendbar: und [(iv)] eine
                     Berechnungsstelle unterhalten]. Eine Änderung, Abberufung, Bestellung oder ein
                     sonstiger Wechsel wird nur wirksam (außer im Insolvenzfall, in dem eine solche
                     Änderung sofort wirksam wird), sofern die Gläubiger hierüber gemäß § 13 vorab unter
                     Einhaltung einer Frist von mindestens 30 Tage und nicht mehr als 45 Tagen informiert
                     wurden. Für die Zwecke dieser Anleihebedingungen bezeichnet "Vereinigte Staaten"
                     die Vereinigten Staaten von Amerika (einschließlich deren Bundesstaaten und des
                     District of Columbia) sowie deren Territorien (einschließlich Puerto Ricos, der U.S.
                     Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, Wake Island und Northern Mariana Islands).
                     (3) Erfüllungsgehilfe(n) der Emittentin. Der Fiscal Agent[,] [und] die Zahlstelle [und die
                     Berechnungsstelle] handeln ausschließlich als Erfüllungsgehilfen der Emittentin und
                     übernehmen keinerlei Verpflichtungen gegenüber den Gläubigern und es wird kein
                     Auftrags- oder Treuhandverhältnis zwischen ihnen und den Gläubigern begründet.
                                                 125




                                                            §7
                                                         STEUERN
Im Fall von        [Sämtliche auf die Schuldverschreibungen zu zahlenden Beträge sind ohne Einbehalt
Schuldverschrei-   oder Abzug von oder aufgrund von gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen Steuern oder
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   sonstigen Abgaben gleich welcher Art zu leisten, die von oder in der Bundesrepublik
werden, ist        Deutschland oder für deren Rechnung oder von oder für Rechnung einer politischen
Folgendes          Untergliederung oder Steuerbehörde der oder in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
anwendbar          auferlegt oder erhoben werden, es sei denn, ein solcher Einbehalt oder Abzug ist
                   gesetzlich vorgeschrieben. Ist ein solcher Einbehalt gesetzlich vorgeschrieben, so
                   wird die Emittentin diejenigen zusätzlichen Beträge (die "zusätzlichen Beträge")
                   zahlen, die erforderlich sind, damit die den Gläubigern zufließenden Nettobeträge
                   nach diesem Einbehalt oder Abzug jeweils den Beträgen entsprechen, die ohne einen
                   solchen Einbehalt oder Abzug von den Gläubigern empfangen worden wären; die
                   Verpflichtung zur Zahlung solcher zusätzlicher Beträge besteht jedoch nicht im
                   Hinblick auf Steuern und Abgaben, die:
                   (a) von einer als Depotbank oder Inkassobeauftragter des Gläubigers handelnden
                       Person oder sonst auf andere Weise zu entrichten sind als dadurch, dass die
                       Emittentin aus den von ihr zu leistenden Zahlungen von Kapital oder Zinsen einen
                       Abzug oder Einbehalt vornimmt; oder
                   (b) wegen einer gegenwärtigen oder früheren persönlichen oder geschäftlichen
                       Beziehung des Gläubigers zu der Bundesrepublik Deutschland zu zahlen sind, und
                       nicht allein deshalb, weil Zahlungen auf die Schuldverschreibungen aus Quellen in
                       der Bundesrepublik Deutschland stammen (oder für Zwecke der Besteuerung so
                       behandelt werden) oder dort besichert sind; oder
                   (c) aufgrund (i) einer Richtlinie oder Verordnung der Europäischen Union betreffend
                       die Besteuerung von Zinserträgen oder (ii) einer zwischenstaatlichen Vereinbarung
                       über deren Besteuerung, an der die Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder die
                       Europäische Union beteiligt ist, oder (iii) einer gesetzlichen Vorschrift, die diese
                       Richtlinie, Verordnung oder Vereinbarung umsetzt oder befolgt, abzuziehen oder
                       einzubehalten sind; oder
                   (d) aufgrund einer Rechtsänderung zu zahlen sind, welche später als 30 Tage nach
                       Fälligkeit der betreffenden Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen oder, wenn dies später
                       erfolgt, ordnungsgemäßer Bereitstellung aller fälligen Beträge und einer
                       diesbezüglichen Bekanntmachung gemäß § 13 wirksam wird; oder
                   (e) aufgrund der Ansässigkeit des Gläubigers in einem nicht-kooperativen Staat oder
                       Gebiet im Sinne des Gesetzes zur Abwehr von Steuervermeidung und unfairem
                       Steuerwettbewerb (Steueroasen-Abwehrgesetz) vom 25. Juni 2021 in seiner
                       jeweils gültigen Fassung (einschließlich etwaiger auf der Grundlage dieses
                       Gesetzes erlassener Verordnungen) zu zahlen sind.
                   Die seit dem 1. Januar 2009 in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland geltende
                   Abgeltungssteuer und der darauf erhobene Solidaritätszuschlag sind keine Steuer
                   oder sonstige Abgabe im oben genannten Sinn, für die zusätzliche Beträge seitens
                   der Emittentin zu zahlen wären.]

Im Fall von        [Sämtliche auf die Schuldverschreibungen oder unter der Garantie zu zahlenden
Schuldverschrei-   Beträge sind ohne Einbehalt oder Abzug von oder aufgrund von gegenwärtigen oder
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   zukünftigen Steuern oder sonstigen Abgaben gleich welcher Art zu leisten, die von
begeben werden,    oder in den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder für deren
ist Folgendes      Rechnung oder von oder für Rechnung einer politischen Untergliederung oder
anwendbar          Steuerbehörde der oder in den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
                   auferlegt oder erhoben werden, es sei denn, ein solcher Einbehalt oder Abzug ist
                   gesetzlich vorgeschrieben. Ist ein solcher Einbehalt gesetzlich vorgeschrieben, so
                   wird die Emittentin diejenigen zusätzlichen Beträge (die "zusätzlichen Beträge")
                   zahlen, die erforderlich sind, damit die den Gläubigern zufließenden Nettobeträge
                   nach diesem Einbehalt oder Abzug jeweils den Beträgen entsprechen, die ohne einen
                   solchen Einbehalt oder Abzug von den Gläubigern empfangen worden wären; die
                   Verpflichtung zur Zahlung solcher zusätzlicher Beträge besteht jedoch nicht im
                   Hinblick auf Steuern und Abgaben, die:
                                                 126



                   (a) von einer als Depotbank oder Inkassobeauftragter des Gläubigers handelnden
                       Person oder sonst auf andere Weise zu entrichten sind als dadurch, dass die
                       Emittentin aus den von ihr zu leistenden Zahlungen von Kapital oder Zinsen einen
                       Abzug oder Einbehalt vornimmt; oder
                   (b) wegen einer gegenwärtigen oder früheren persönlichen oder geschäftlichen
                       Beziehung des Gläubigers zu den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik
                       Deutschland zu zahlen sind, und nicht allein deshalb, weil Zahlungen auf die
                       Schuldverschreibungen aus Quellen in den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik
                       Deutschland stammen oder für Zwecke der Besteuerung so behandelt werden
                       aufgrund der Anwendung des niederländischen Quellensteuergesetzes 2021 (Wet
                       bronbelasting 2021) abgezogen oder einbehalten werden oder dort besichert sind;
                       oder
                   (c) aufgrund (i) einer Richtlinie oder Verordnung der Europäischen Union betreffend
                       die Besteuerung von Zinserträgen oder (ii) einer zwischenstaatlichen Vereinbarung
                       über deren Besteuerung, an der die Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder die
                       Niederlande oder die Europäische Union beteiligt ist, oder (iii) einer gesetzlichen
                       Vorschrift, die diese Richtlinie, Verordnung oder Vereinbarung umsetzt oder
                       befolgt, abzuziehen oder einzubehalten sind; oder
                   (d) aufgrund einer Rechtsänderung zu zahlen sind, welche später als 30 Tage nach
                       Fälligkeit der betreffenden Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen oder, wenn dies später
                       erfolgt, ordnungsgemäßer Bereitstellung aller fälligen Beträge und einer
                       diesbezüglichen Bekanntmachung gemäß § 13 wirksam wird.
                   .
                   Die seit dem 1. Januar 2009 in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland geltende
                   Abgeltungssteuer und der darauf erhobene Solidaritätszuschlag sind keine Steuer
                   oder sonstige Abgabe im oben genannten Sinn, für die zusätzliche Beträge seitens
                   der Emittentin zu zahlen wären.]

                                                         §8
                                                   VORLEGUNGSFRIST
                   Die in § 801 Absatz 1 Satz 1 BGB bestimmte Vorlegungsfrist wird für die
                   Schuldverschreibungen auf zehn Jahre verkürzt.

                                                          §9
                                                       KÜNDIGUNG
Im Fall von        [(1) Kündigungsgründe. Jeder Gläubiger ist berechtigt, seine Schuldverschreibung zu
Schuldverschrei-   kündigen und deren sofortige Rückzahlung zu ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag zuzüglich
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   (etwaiger) bis zum Tage der Rückzahlung aufgelaufener Zinsen zu verlangen, falls:
werden, ist        (a) die Emittentin Kapital oder Zinsen nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach dem
Folgendes
anwendbar              betreffenden Fälligkeitstag zahlt; oder
                   (b) die Emittentin die ordnungsgemäße Erfüllung einer anderen Verpflichtung aus den
                       Schuldverschreibungen unterlässt und diese Unterlassung länger als 30 Tage
                       fortdauert, nachdem der Fiscal Agent hierüber eine Benachrichtigung von einem
                       Gläubiger erhalten hat; oder
                   (c) eine Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit (wie in § 2 Absatz (2) definiert) oder ein
                       Schuldscheindarlehen (mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr)
                       der Emittentin vorzeitig zahlbar wird aufgrund einer Nicht- oder Schlechtleistung
                       des dieser Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit oder des Schuldscheindarlehens (mit einer
                       ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr) zugrunde liegenden Vertrages,
                       oder die Emittentin einer Zahlungsverpflichtung in Höhe oder im Gegenwert von
                       mehr als EUR 200.000.000 aus einer Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit oder einem
                       Schuldscheindarlehen (mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr)
                       oder    aufgrund     einer    Bürgschaft    oder    Garantie,    die    für    die
                       Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit   oder    ein   Schuldscheindarlehen     (mit   einer
                       ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr) Dritter gegeben wurde, nicht
                       innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach ihrer Fälligkeit bzw. im Falle einer Bürgschaft oder
                       Garantie nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach Inanspruchnahme aus dieser
                                                 127


                      Bürgschaft oder Garantie nachkommt, es sei denn, die Emittentin bestreitet in
                      gutem Glauben, dass diese Zahlungsverpflichtung besteht oder fällig ist bzw. diese
                      Bürgschaft oder Garantie berechtigterweise geltend gemacht wird, oder falls eine
                      für solche Verbindlichkeiten bestellte Sicherheit für die oder von den daraus
                      berechtigten Gläubiger(n) in Anspruch genommen wird; oder
                   (d) die Emittentin ihre Zahlungsunfähigkeit allgemein bekanntgibt oder ihre Zahlungen
                       einstellt; oder
                   (e) ein Gericht ein Insolvenzverfahren gegen die Emittentin eröffnet, ein solches
                       Verfahren eingeleitet und nicht innerhalb von 60 Tagen aufgehoben oder
                       ausgesetzt worden ist, oder die Emittentin ein solches Verfahren einleitet oder
                       beantragt; oder
                   (f) die Emittentin ihre Geschäftstätigkeit ganz oder überwiegend einstellt, alle oder den
                       wesentlichen Teil ihres Vermögens veräußert oder anderweitig abgibt und (i)
                       dadurch den Wert ihres Vermögens wesentlich vermindert und (ii) es dadurch
                       wahrscheinlich wird, dass die Emittentin ihre Zahlungsverpflichtungen gegenüber
                       den Gläubigern nicht mehr erfüllen kann; oder
                   (g) die Emittentin in Liquidation tritt, es sei denn, dies geschieht im Zusammenhang
                       mit einer Verschmelzung oder einer anderen Form des Zusammenschlusses mit
                       einer anderen Gesellschaft oder im Zusammenhang mit einer Umwandlung und
                       diese Gesellschaft übernimmt alle Verpflichtungen, die die Emittentin im
                       Zusammenhang mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen eingegangen ist.
                   Das Kündigungsrecht erlischt, falls der Kündigungsgrund vor Ausübung des Rechts
                   geheilt wurde.
                   (2) Quorum. In den Fällen des Absatz (1)(b) und/oder (1)(c) wird eine Kündigung,
                   sofern nicht bei deren Eingang zugleich einer der in Absatz (1)(a) und (1)(d) bis (g)
                   bezeichneten Kündigungsgründe vorliegt, erst wirksam, wenn bei dem Fiscal Agent
                   Kündigungserklärungen      von    Gläubigern     von   Schuldverschreibungen       im
                                                                 1
                   Gesamtnennbetrag       von     mindestens       /10  der     dann     ausstehenden
                   Schuldverschreibungen eingegangen sind.
                   (3) Benachrichtigung. Eine Benachrichtigung, einschließlich einer Kündigung der
                   Schuldverschreibungen gemäß Absatz (1) ist schriftlich in deutscher oder englischer
                   Sprache gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent zu erklären und persönlich oder per
                   Einschreiben an dessen bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle zu übermitteln.]

Im Fall von        [(1) Kündigungsgründe. Jeder Gläubiger ist berechtigt, seine Schuldverschreibung zu
Schuldverschrei-   kündigen und deren sofortige Rückzahlung zu ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag zuzüglich
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   (etwaiger) bis zum Tage der Rückzahlung aufgelaufener Zinsen zu verlangen, falls:
begeben werden,    (a) die Emittentin Kapital oder Zinsen nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach dem
ist Folgendes
anwendbar              betreffenden Fälligkeitstag zahlt; oder
                   (b) die Emittentin die ordnungsgemäße Erfüllung einer anderen Verpflichtung aus den
                       Schuldverschreibungen oder die Garantin die Erfüllung einer Verpflichtung aus der
                       Garantie unterlässt und diese Unterlassung länger als 30 Tage fortdauert,
                       nachdem der Fiscal Agent hierüber eine Benachrichtigung von einem Gläubiger
                       erhalten hat; oder
                   (c) eine Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit (wie in § 2 Absatz (2) definiert) oder ein
                       Schuldscheindarlehen (mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr)
                       der Emittentin oder der Garantin vorzeitig zahlbar wird aufgrund einer Nicht- oder
                       Schlechtleistung     des     dieser    Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit   oder      des
                       Schuldscheindarlehens zugrunde liegenden Vertrages, oder die Emittentin oder
                       die Garantin einer Zahlungsverpflichtung in Höhe oder im Gegenwert von mehr als
                       EUR 200.000.000       aus    einer    Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit   oder    einem
                       Schuldscheindarlehen oder aufgrund einer Bürgschaft oder Garantie, die für die
                       Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit oder ein Schuldscheindarlehen Dritter gegeben wurde,
                       nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach ihrer Fälligkeit bzw. im Falle einer Bürgschaft
                       oder Garantie nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach Inanspruchnahme aus dieser
                       Bürgschaft oder Garantie nachkommt, es sei denn, die Emittentin oder die
                       Garantin bestreitet in gutem Glauben, dass diese Zahlungsverpflichtung besteht
                       oder fällig ist bzw. diese Bürgschaft oder Garantie berechtigterweise geltend
                                                 128


                      gemacht wird, oder falls eine für solche Verbindlichkeiten bestellte Sicherheit für
                      die oder von den daraus berechtigten Gläubiger(n) in Anspruch genommen wird;
                      oder
                   (d) die Emittentin oder die Garantin ihre Zahlungsunfähigkeit allgemein bekanntgibt
                       oder ihre Zahlungen einstellt; oder
                   (e) ein Gericht ein Insolvenzverfahren gegen die Emittentin oder die Garantin eröffnet,
                       ein solches Verfahren eingeleitet und nicht innerhalb von 60 Tagen aufgehoben
                       oder ausgesetzt worden ist, oder die Emittentin oder die Garantin ein solches
                       Verfahren einleitet oder beantragt oder die Emittentin ein "surseance van betaling"
                       (im Sinne des niederländischen Insolvenzrechts) beantragt; oder
                   (f) die Emittentin oder die Garantin ihre Geschäftstätigkeit ganz oder überwiegend
                       einstellt, alle oder den wesentlichen Teil ihres Vermögens veräußert oder
                       anderweitig abgibt und (i) dadurch den Wert ihres Vermögens wesentlich vermindert
                       und (ii) es dadurch wahrscheinlich wird, dass die Emittentin oder die Garantin ihre
                       Zahlungsverpflichtungen gegenüber den Gläubigern nicht mehr erfüllen kann; oder
                   (g) die Emittentin oder die Garantin in Liquidation tritt, es sei denn, dies geschieht im
                       Zusammenhang mit einer Verschmelzung oder einer anderen Form des
                       Zusammenschlusses mit einer anderen Gesellschaft oder im Zusammenhang mit
                       einer Umwandlung und diese Gesellschaft übernimmt alle Verpflichtungen, die die
                       Emittentin oder die Garantin im Zusammenhang mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen
                       eingegangen ist; oder
                   (h) die Garantie aus irgendeinem Grund nicht mehr wirksam und rechtlich bindend ist.
                   Das Kündigungsrecht erlischt, falls der Kündigungsgrund vor Ausübung des Rechts
                   geheilt wurde.
                   (2) Quorum. In den Fällen des Absatz (1)(b) und/oder (1)(c) wird eine Kündigung,
                   sofern nicht bei deren Eingang zugleich einer der in Absatz (1)(a) und (1)(d) bis (h)
                   bezeichneten Kündigungsgründe vorliegt, erst wirksam, wenn bei dem Fiscal Agent
                   Kündigungserklärungen      von    Gläubigern     von   Schuldverschreibungen       im
                                                                 1
                   Gesamtnennbetrag       von     mindestens       /10  der     dann     ausstehenden
                   Schuldverschreibungen eingegangen sind.
                   (3) Benachrichtigung. Eine Benachrichtigung, einschließlich einer Kündigung der
                   Schuldverschreibungen gemäß Absatz (1) ist schriftlich in deutscher oder englischer
                   Sprache gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent zu erklären und persönlich oder per
                   Einschreiben an dessen bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle zu übermitteln.]

                                                           § 10
                                                        ERSETZUNG
Im Fall von        [(1) Ersetzung. Die Emittentin ist jederzeit berechtigt, sofern sie sich nicht mit einer
Schuldverschrei-   Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen auf die Schuldverschreibungen in Verzug befindet,
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger ein mit ihr verbundenes Unternehmen (wie unten
werden, ist        definiert) an ihrer Stelle als Hauptschuldnerin (die "Nachfolgeschuldnerin") für alle
Folgendes          Verpflichtungen aus und im Zusammenhang mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen
anwendbar          einzusetzen, vorausgesetzt, dass:]

Im Fall von        [(1) Ersetzung. Die Emittentin ist jederzeit berechtigt, sofern sie sich nicht mit einer
Schuldverschrei-   Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen auf die Schuldverschreibungen in Verzug befindet,
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger entweder die Garantin oder ein mit der Garantin
begeben werden,    verbundenes Unternehmen (wie unten definiert) an ihrer Stelle als Hauptschuldnerin
ist Folgendes      (die "Nachfolgeschuldnerin") für alle Verpflichtungen aus und im Zusammenhang mit
anwendbar          diesen Schuldverschreibungen einzusetzen, vorausgesetzt, dass:]
                   (a) die Nachfolgeschuldnerin alle Verpflichtungen der Emittentin in Bezug auf die
                       Schuldverschreibungen übernimmt;
                   (b) die Nachfolgeschuldnerin alle erforderlichen Genehmigungen erhalten hat und
                       berechtigt ist, an den Fiscal Agent die zur Erfüllung der Zahlungsverpflichtungen
                       aus den Schuldverschreibungen zahlbaren Beträge in der festgelegten Währung
                       zu zahlen, ohne verpflichtet zu sein, jeweils in dem Land, in dem die
                       Nachfolgeschuldnerin oder die Emittentin ihren Sitz oder Steuersitz haben,
                                                 129


                      erhobene Steuern oder andere Abgaben jeder Art abzuziehen oder einzubehalten;
                   (c) die Nachfolgeschuldnerin sich verpflichtet hat, jeden Gläubiger hinsichtlich solcher
                       Steuern, Abgaben oder behördlichen Lasten freizustellen, die einem Gläubiger
                       bezüglich der Ersetzung auferlegt werden;
Im Fall von        [(d) sichergestellt ist, dass sich die Verpflichtungen der Emittentin aus der Garantie
Schuldverschrei-       und der Negativverpflichtung des Debt Issuance Programms der Emittentin (auf
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                       die die unten in § 11 aufgeführten auf die Schuldverschreibungen anwendbaren
werden, ist            Bestimmungen       sinngemäß       Anwendung       finden)    auch      auf    die
Folgendes              Schuldverschreibungen der Nachfolgeschuldnerin erstrecken; und]
anwendbar


Im Fall von        [(d) sichergestellt ist, dass sich die Verpflichtungen der Garantin aus der Garantie
Schuldverschrei-       und der Negativverpflichtung des Debt Issuance Programms der Emittentin auch
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                       auf die Schuldverschreibungen der Nachfolgeschuldnerin erstrecken; und]
begeben werden,
ist Folgendes
anwendbar

                   (e) dem Fiscal Agent jeweils eine Bestätigung bezüglich der betroffenen
                       Rechtsordnungen von anerkannten Rechtsanwälten vorgelegt wird, dass die
                       Bestimmungen in den vorstehenden Unterabsätzen (a), (b), (c) und (d) erfüllt
                       wurden.
                   Für die Zwecke dieses § 10 bedeutet "verbundenes Unternehmen" ein verbundenes
                   Unternehmen im Sinne von § 15 Aktiengesetz.
                   (2) Bekanntmachung. Jede Ersetzung ist gemäß § 13 bekannt zu machen.
                   (3) Ermächtigung der Emittentin. Im Fall einer solchen Ersetzung ist die Emittentin
                   ermächtigt, die die Schuldverschreibungen verbriefende Globalurkunde und diese
                   Anleihebedingungen ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger in dem notwendigen Umfang zu
                   ändern, um die sich aus der Ersetzung ergebenden Änderungen widerzuspiegeln.
                   Eine   entsprechend    angepaßte,    die     Schuldverschreibungen     verbriefende
                   Globalurkunde und Anleihebedingungen werden beim Clearing System hinterlegt.

                                                § 11
                      ÄNDERUNG DER ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN, GEMEINSAMER VERTRETER[,
                                      ÄNDERUNG DER GARANTIE]
                   (1) Änderung der Anleihebedingungen. Die Gläubiger können entsprechend den
                   Bestimmungen des Gesetzes über Schuldverschreibungen aus Gesamtemissionen, in
                   der geänderten Fassung (Schuldverschreibungsgesetz – "SchVG") durch einen
                   Beschluss mit der in Absatz 2 bestimmten Mehrheit über einen im SchVG
                   zugelassenen Gegenstand eine Änderung der Anleihebedingungen mit der Emittentin
                   vereinbaren. Die Mehrheitsbeschlüsse der Gläubiger sind für alle Gläubiger
                   gleichermaßen verbindlich. Ein Mehrheitsbeschluß der Gläubiger, der nicht gleiche
                   Bedingungen für alle Gläubiger vorsieht, ist unwirksam, es sei denn die
                   benachteiligten Gläubiger stimmen ihrer Benachteiligung ausdrücklich zu.
                   (2) Mehrheitserfordernisse. Die Gläubiger entscheiden mit einer Mehrheit von
                   mindestens 75 % der an der Abstimmung teilnehmenden Stimmrechte. Beschlüsse,
                   durch welche der wesentliche Inhalt der Anleihebedingungen nicht geändert wird und
                   die keinen Gegenstand der § 5 Absatz 3, Nr. 1 bis Nr. 8 des SchVG betreffen,
                   bedürfen zu ihrer Wirksamkeit einer einfachen Mehrheit der an der Abstimmung
                   teilnehmenden Stimmrechte.
                   (3) Beschlüsse der Gläubiger. Beschlüsse der Gläubiger werden nach Wahl der
                   Emittentin im Wege der Abstimmung ohne Versammlung nach § 18 und §§ 5 ff.
                   SchVG oder einer Gläubigerversammlung nach §§ 5 ff. SchVG gefasst.
                   (4) Leitung der Abstimmung ohne Versammlung. Die Abstimmung wird von einem von
                   der Emittentin beauftragten Notar oder, falls der gemeinsame Vertreter zur
                   Abstimmung aufgefordert hat, von dem gemeinsamen Vertreter der Gläubiger geleitet.
                   (5) Stimmrecht. An Abstimmungen der Gläubiger nimmt jeder Gläubiger nach
                   Maßgabe des Nennwerts oder des rechnerischen Anteils seiner Berechtigung an den
                                                   130


                     ausstehenden Schuldverschreibungen teil.
                     (6) Gemeinsamer Vertreter.
Falls kein           [Die Gläubiger können durch Mehrheitsbeschluß zur Wahrnehmung ihrer Rechte
gemeinsamer          einen gemeinsamen Vertreter für alle Gläubiger bestellen.]
Vertreter in den
Bedingungen
bestellt wird, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall der          [Gemeinsamer Vertreter ist [Gemeinsamer Vertreter]. Die Haftung des
Bestellung des       gemeinsamen Vertreters ist auf das Zehnfache seiner jährlichen Vergütung
gemeinsamen
Vertreters in den
                     beschränkt, es sei denn, dem gemeinsamen Vertreter fällt Vorsatz oder grobe
Bedingungen, ist     Fahrlässigkeit zur Last.]
Folgendes
anwendbar

                     Der gemeinsame Vertreter hat die Aufgaben und Befugnisse, welche ihm durch
                     Gesetz oder von den Gläubigern durch Mehrheitsbeschluß eingeräumt wurden. Er hat
                     die Weisungen der Gläubiger zu befolgen. Soweit er zur Geltendmachung von
                     Rechten der Gläubiger ermächtigt ist, sind die einzelnen Gläubiger zur selbständigen
                     Geltendmachung dieser Rechte nicht befugt, es sei denn der Mehrheitsbeschluß sieht
                     dies ausdrücklich vor. Über seine Tätigkeit hat der gemeinsame Vertreter den
                     Gläubigern zu berichten. Für die Abberufung und die sonstigen Rechte und Pflichten
                     des gemeinsamen Vertreters gelten die Vorschriften des SchVG.
                     (7) Verfahrensrechtliche     Bestimmungen     über   Gläubigerbeschlüsse   in   einer
                     Gläubigerversammlung.
                     (a) Frist, Anmeldung, Nachweis.
                     (i) Die Gläubigerversammlung        ist mindestens   14   Tage   vor dem Tag     der
                     Versammlung einzuberufen.
                     (ii) Sieht die Einberufung vor, dass die Teilnahme an der Gläubigerversammlung oder
                     die Ausübung der Stimmrechte davon abhängig ist, dass sich die Gläubiger vor der
                     Versammlung anmelden, so tritt für die Berechnung der Einberufungsfrist an die Stelle
                     des Tages der Versammlung der Tag, bis zu dessen Ablauf sich die Gläubiger vor der
                     Versammlung anmelden müssen. Die Anmeldung muss unter der in der
                     Bekanntmachung der Einberufung mitgeteilten Adresse spätestens am dritten Tag vor
                     der Gläubigerversammlung zugehen.
                     (iii) Die Einberufung kann vorsehen, wie die Berechtigung zur Teilnahme an der
                     Gläubigerversammlung nachzuweisen ist. Sofern die Einberufung nichts anderes
                     bestimmt, berechtigt ein von einem durch die Emittentin zu ernennenden Beauftragten
                     ausgestellter Stimmzettel seinen Inhaber zur Teilnahme an und zur Stimmabgabe in
                     der Gläubigerversammlung. Der Stimmzettel kann vom Gläubiger bezogen werden,
                     indem er mindestens sechs Tage vor der für die Gläubigerversammlung bestimmten
                     Zeit (a) seine Schuldverschreibungen bei einem durch die Emittentin zu ernennenden
                     Beauftragten oder gemäß einer Weisung dieses Beauftragten hinterlegt hat oder (b)
                     seine Schuldverschreibungen bei einer Depotbank in Übereinstimmung mit deren
                     Verfahrensregeln gesperrt sowie einen Nachweis über die Inhaberschaft und
                     Sperrung der Schuldverschreibungen an den Beauftragten der Emittentin geliefert hat.
                     Die Einberufung kann auch die Erbringung eines Identitätsnachweises der ein
                     Stimmrecht ausübenden Person vorsehen.
                     (b) Inhalt der Einberufung, Bekanntmachung.
                     (i) In der Einberufung (die "Einberufung") müssen die Firma, der Sitz der Emittentin,
                     die Zeit und der Ort der Gläubigerversammlung sowie die Bedingungen angegeben
                     werden, von denen die Teilnahme an der Gläubigerversammlung und die Ausübung
                     des Stimmrechts abhängen, einschließlich der in Absatz (a)(ii) und (iii) genannten
                     Voraussetzungen.
                     (ii) Die Einberufung ist unverzüglich im Bundesanzeiger sowie zusätzlich gemäß § 13
                     öffentlich bekannt zu machen. Die Kosten der Bekanntmachung hat die Emittentin zu
                     tragen.
                                                131



                   (iii) Von dem Tag an, an dem die Gläubigerversammlung einberufen wurde, bis zum
                   Tag der Gläubigerversammlung wird die Emittentin auf ihrer Internetseite den
                   Gläubigern die Einberufung und die exakten Bedingungen für die Teilnahme an der
                   Gläubigerversammlung und die Ausübung von Stimmrechten zur Verfügung stellen.
                   (c) Auskunftspflicht, Abstimmung.
                   (i) Die Emittentin hat jedem Gläubiger auf Verlangen in der Gläubigerversammlung
                   Auskunft zu erteilen, soweit sie zur sachgemäßen Beurteilung eines Gegenstands der
                   Tagesordnung oder eines Vorschlags zur Beschlussfassung erforderlich ist.
                   (ii) Auf die Abgabe und die Auszählung der Stimmen sind die Vorschriften des
                   Aktiengesetzes über die Abstimmung der Aktionäre in der Hauptversammlung
                   entsprechend anzuwenden, soweit nicht in der Einberufung etwas anderes
                   vorgesehen ist.
                   (d) Bekanntmachung von Beschlüssen.
                   (i) Die Emittentin hat die Beschlüsse der Gläubiger auf ihre Kosten in geeigneter
                   Form öffentlich bekannt zu machen. Hat die Emittentin ihren Sitz in der
                   Bundesrepublik Deutschland, so sind die Beschlüsse unverzüglich im Bundesanzeiger
                   sowie zusätzlich gemäß § 13 zu veröffentlichen; die nach § 50 Absatz 1 des
                   Wertpapierhandelsgesetzes vorgeschriebene Veröffentlichung ist jedoch ausreichend.
                   (ii) Außerdem hat die Emittentin die Beschlüsse der Gläubiger sowie, wenn ein
                   Gläubigerbeschluss die Anleihebedingungen ändert, den Wortlaut der ursprünglichen
                   Anleihebedingungen vom Tag nach der Gläubigerversammlung an für die Dauer von
                   mindestens einem Monat im Internet unter ihrer Adresse der Öffentlichkeit zugänglich
                   zu machen.
                   (e) Abstimmung ohne Versammlung.
                   In der Aufforderung zur Stimmabgabe ist der Zeitraum anzugeben, innerhalb dessen
                   die Stimmen abgegeben werden können. Er beträgt mindestens 72 Stunden.
                   Während des Abstimmungszeitraums können die Gläubiger ihre Stimme gegenüber
                   dem Abstimmungsleiter in Textform abgeben. In der Aufforderung können auch
                   andere Formen der Stimmabgabe vorgesehen werden. In der Aufforderung muss im
                   Einzelnen angegeben werden, welche Voraussetzungen erfüllt sein müssen, damit die
                   Stimmen gezählt werden.
Im Fall von        [(8) Änderung der Garantie. Die oben aufgeführten auf die Schuldverschreibungen
Schuldverschrei-   anwendbaren Bestimmungen finden sinngemäß auf die Bestimmungen der Garantie
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   der BASF Anwendung.]
begeben werden,
ist Folgendes
anwendbar


                                                   § 12
                                BEGEBUNG WEITERER SCHULDVERSCHREIBUNGEN,
                                         ANKAUF UND ENTWERTUNG
                   (1) Begebung weiterer Schuldverschreibungen. Die Emittentin ist berechtigt, jederzeit
                   ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger weitere Schuldverschreibungen mit gleicher
                   Ausstattung (gegebenenfalls mit Ausnahme des Tags der Begebung, des
                   Verzinsungsbeginns und/oder des Ausgabepreises) in der Weise zu begeben, dass
                   sie mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen eine einheitliche Serie bilden.
                   (2) Ankauf. Die Emittentin ist berechtigt, jederzeit Schuldverschreibungen im Markt
                   oder anderweitig zu jedem beliebigen Preis zu kaufen. Die von der Emittentin
                   erworbenen Schuldverschreibungen können nach Wahl der Emittentin von ihr
                   gehalten, weiterverkauft oder bei dem Fiscal Agent zwecks Entwertung eingereicht
                   werden. Sofern diese Käufe durch öffentliches Angebot erfolgen, muss dieses
                   Angebot allen Gläubigern gemacht werden.
                   (3) Entwertung. Sämtliche vollständig zurückgezahlten Schuldverschreibungen sind
                   unverzüglich zu entwerten und können nicht wiederbegeben oder wiederverkauft
                   werden.
                                                      132




                                                                 § 13
                                                            MITTEILUNGEN
Im Fall von              [(1) Bekanntmachung. Alle die Schuldverschreibungen betreffenden Mitteilungen
Schuldverschrei-         erfolgen durch elektronische Publikation auf der Website der Luxemburger Börse
bungen, die in der
offiziellen Liste der
                         (www.bourse.lu). Jede Mitteilung gilt am dritten Tag nach dem Tag der
Luxemburger              Veröffentlichung als wirksam erfolgt.
Börse notiert
werden, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar
              i.i.i.1.   (2) Mitteilungen an das Clearing System. Solange Schuldverschreibungen an der
                         Luxemburger Börse notiert sind, findet Absatz (1) Anwendung. Soweit die Regeln der
                         Luxemburger Börse dies zulassen, kann die Emittentin eine Veröffentlichung nach
                         Absatz (1) durch eine Mitteilung an das Clearing System zur Weiterleitung an die
                         Gläubiger ersetzen; jede derartige Mitteilung gilt am siebten Tag nach dem Tag der
                         Mitteilung an das Clearing System als den Gläubigern mitgeteilt.]

Im Fall von i.i.i.2.     [(1) Mitteilungen an das Clearing System. Die Emittentin wird alle die
Schuldverschrei-         Schuldverschreibungen betreffenden Mitteilungen an das Clearing System zur
bungen, die nicht
an einer Börse
                         Weiterleitung an die Gläubiger übermitteln. Jede derartige Mitteilung gilt am siebten
notiert sind, ist        Tag nach dem Tag der Mitteilung an das Clearing System als den Gläubigern
Folgendes                mitgeteilt.]
anwendbar

                         [(3)] Form der Mitteilung. Mitteilungen, die von einem Gläubiger gemacht werden,
                         müssen in Textform (z.B. eMail oder Fax) oder schriftlich erfolgen und zusammen mit
                         dem Nachweis seiner Inhaberschaft gemäß § 14 Absatz [4] an den Fiscal Agent
                         geschickt werden. Eine solche Mitteilung kann über das Clearing System in der von
                         dem Fiscal Agent und dem Clearing System dafür vorgesehenen Weise erfolgen.

                                                        § 14
                                 ANWENDBARES RECHT, GERICHTSSTAND UND GERICHTLICHE
                                                GELTENDMACHUNG
                         (1) Anwendbares Recht. Form und Inhalt der Schuldverschreibungen sowie die
                         Rechte und Pflichten der Gläubiger und der Emittentin bestimmen sich in jeder
                         Hinsicht nach deutschem Recht.
                         (2) Gerichtsstand. Nicht ausschließlich zuständig für sämtliche im Zusammenhang mit
                         den Schuldverschreibungen entstehenden Klagen oder sonstige Verfahren
                         ("Rechtsstreitigkeiten") ist das Landgericht Frankfurt am Main, Bundesrepublik
                         Deutschland.
Im Falle von             [(3) Bestellung von Zustellungsbevollmächtigten. Für etwaige Rechtsstreitigkeiten vor
Schuldver-               deutschen Gerichten bestellt die Emittentin die BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056
schreibungen, die
von BASF Finance
                         Ludwigshafen      am      Rhein,    Bundesrepublik      Deutschland,     zu     ihrer
begeben werden,          Zustellungsbevollmächtigten in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland.]
ist Folgendes
anwendbar

                         [(4)] Gerichtliche Geltendmachung. Jeder Gläubiger von Schuldverschreibungen ist
                         berechtigt, in jedem Rechtsstreit gegen die Emittentin oder in jedem Rechtsstreit, in
                         dem der Gläubiger und die Emittentin Partei sind, seine Rechte aus diesen
                         Schuldverschreibungen im eigenen Namen auf der folgenden Grundlage zu schützen
                         oder geltend zu machen: (i) er bringt eine Bescheinigung der Depotbank bei, bei der
                         er für die Schuldverschreibungen ein Wertpapierdepot unterhält, welche (a) den
                         vollständigen Namen und die vollständige Adresse des Gläubigers enthält, (b) den
                         Gesamtnennbetrag der Schuldverschreibungen bezeichnet, die unter dem Datum der
                         Bestätigung auf dem Wertpapierdepot verbucht sind und (c) bestätigt, dass die
                         Depotbank gegenüber dem Clearing System eine schriftliche Erklärung abgegeben
                         hat, die die vorstehend unter (a) und (b) bezeichneten Informationen enthält; und (ii)
                         er legt eine Kopie der die betreffenden Schuldverschreibungen verbriefenden
                         Globalurkunde      vor,  deren     Übereinstimmung     mit    dem    Original   eine
                                                   133


                      vertretungsberechtigte Person des Clearing Systems oder des Verwahrers des
                      Clearing Systems bestätigt hat, ohne dass eine Vorlage der Originalbelege oder der
                      die Schuldverschreibungen verbriefenden Globalurkunde in einem solchen Verfahren
                      erforderlich wäre. Für die Zwecke des Vorstehenden bezeichnet "Depotbank" jede
                      Bank oder ein sonstiges anerkanntes Finanzinstitut, das berechtigt ist, das
                      Wertpapierverwahrungsgeschäft zu betreiben und bei der/dem der Gläubiger ein
                      Wertpapierdepot für die Schuldverschreibungen unterhält, einschließlich des Clearing
                      Systems. Unbeschadet des Vorstehenden kann jeder Gläubiger seine Rechte aus den
                      Schuldverschreibungen auch auf jede andere Weise schützen oder geltend machen,
                      die im Land des Rechtsstreits prozessual zulässig ist.

                                                             § 15
                                                           SPRACHE
Falls die Anleihe-    [Diese Anleihebedingungen sind in deutscher Sprache abgefasst. Eine Übersetzung
bedingungen in        in die englische Sprache ist beigefügt. Der deutsche Text ist bindend und maßgeblich.
deutscher Sprache
mit einer
                      Die Übersetzung in die englische Sprache ist unverbindlich.]
Übersetzung in die
englische Sprache
abgefasst sind, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Falls die Anleihe-    [Diese Anleihebedingungen sind in englischer Sprache abgefasst. Eine Übersetzung
bedingungen in        in die deutsche Sprache ist beigefügt. Der englische Text ist bindend und maßgeblich.
englischer Sprache
mit einer
                      Die Übersetzung in die deutsche Sprache ist unverbindlich.]
Übersetzung in die
deutsche Sprache
abgefasst sind, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Falls die Anleihe-    [Diese Anleihebedingungen sind ausschließlich in deutscher Sprache abgefasst.]
bedingungen
ausschließlich in
deutscher Sprache
abgefasst sind, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar
                                                     134




                      OPTION II – Anleihebedingungen für Schuldverschreibungen mit variabler
                      Verzinsung


                                 ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN DER SCHULDVERSCHREIBUNGEN
                                           DEUTSCHSPRACHIGE FASSUNG

                                                     §1
                               WÄHRUNG, STÜCKELUNG, FORM, BESTIMMTE DEFINITIONEN
                      (1) Währung; Stückelung. Diese Serie der Schuldverschreibungen (die
                      "Schuldverschreibungen") der [BASF SE] [BASF Finance Europe N.V.]
                      (["BASF"]["BASF Finance"] oder die "Emittentin") wird in [festgelegte Währung]
                      (die "festgelegte Währung") im Gesamtnennbetrag [Falls die Globalurkunde eine
                      NGN ist, ist Folgendes anwendbar: (vorbehaltlich § 1 Absatz (4))] von
                      [Gesamtnennbetrag] (in Worten: [Gesamtnennbetrag in Worten]) in einer
                      Stückelung von [festgelegte Stückelung] (die "festgelegte Stückelung") begeben.
                      (2) Form. Die Schuldverschreibungen lauten auf den Inhaber.
Im Fall von           [(3) Dauerglobalurkunde. Die Schuldverschreibungen sind durch eine Dauerglobal-
Schuldver-            urkunde (die "Dauerglobalurkunde") ohne Zinsscheine verbrieft. Die Dauerglobal-
schreibungen, die
durch eine
                      urkunde trägt die Unterschriften ordnungsgemäß bevollmächtigter Vertreter der
Dauerglobal-          Emittentin und ist von dem Fiscal Agent oder in dessen Namen mit einer
urkunde verbrieft     Kontrollunterschrift versehen. Einzelurkunden und Zinsscheine werden nicht
sind, ist Folgendes   ausgegeben.]
anwendbar


Im Fall von           [(3) Vorläufige Globalurkunde – Austausch.
Schuldver-
schreibungen, die     (a) Die Schuldverschreibungen sind anfänglich durch eine vorläufige Globalurkunde
anfänglich durch          (die "vorläufige Globalurkunde") ohne Zinsscheine verbrieft. Die vorläufige
eine vorläufige           Globalurkunde wird gegen Schuldverschreibungen in der festgelegten Stückelung,
Globalurkunde
verbrieft sind, ist
                          die durch eine Dauerglobalurkunde (die "Dauerglobalurkunde") ohne Zinsscheine
Folgendes                 verbrieft sind, ausgetauscht. Die vorläufige Globalurkunde und die
anwendbar                 Dauerglobalurkunde tragen jeweils die Unterschriften ordnungsgemäß
                          bevollmächtigter Vertreter der Emittentin und sind jeweils von dem Fiscal Agent
                          oder in dessen Namen mit einer Kontrollunterschrift versehen. Einzelurkunden und
                          Zinsscheine werden nicht ausgegeben.
                      (b) Die vorläufige Globalurkunde wird frühestens an einem Tag gegen die
                          Dauerglobalurkunde austauschbar, der 40 Tage nach dem Tag der Begebung der
                          durch die vorläufige Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen liegt. Ein
                          solcher Austausch darf nur nach Vorlage von Bescheinigungen gemäß U.S.
                          Steuerrecht erfolgen, wonach der oder die wirtschaftlichen Eigentümer der durch
                          die vorläufige Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen keine U.S.-
                          Personen sind (ausgenommen bestimmte Finanzinstitute oder bestimmte
                          Personen, die Schuldverschreibungen über solche Finanzinstitute halten).
                          Zinszahlungen     auf    durch     eine   vorläufige      Globalurkunde      verbriefte
                          Schuldverschreibungen erfolgen erst nach Vorlage solcher Bescheinigungen. Eine
                          gesonderte Bescheinigung ist für jede solche Zinszahlung erforderlich. Jede
                          Bescheinigung, die am oder nach dem 40. Tag nach dem Tag der Ausgabe der
                          durch die vorläufige Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen eingeht,
                          wird als ein Ersuchen behandelt werden, diese vorläufige Globalurkunde gemäß
                          diesem Absatz (b) dieses § 1 Absatz (3) auszutauschen. Wertpapiere, die im
                          Austausch für die vorläufige Globalurkunde geliefert werden, dürfen nur außerhalb
                          der Vereinigten Staaten (wie in § 6 Absatz (2) definiert) geliefert werden.]
                      (4) Clearing System. Die Globalurkunde, die die Schuldverschreibung verbrieft, wird
                      von einem oder für ein Clearing Systems verwahrt. "Clearing System" bedeutet [Bei
                      mehr als einem Clearing System ist Folgendes anwendbar: jeweils] Folgendes:
                      [Clearstream Banking AG, Neue Börsenstr. 1, 60487 Frankfurt am Main,
                      Bundesrepublik Deutschland, ("CBF")] [Clearstream Banking S.A., 42 Avenue JF
                      Kennedy, 1855 Luxemburg, Großherzogtum Luxemburg, ("CBL") und Euroclear Bank
                      SA/NV, Boulevard du Roi Albert II, 1210 Brussels, Belgien, ("Euroclear") (CBL und
                                                 135


                    Euroclear jeweils ein     "ICSD"   und    zusammen     die   "ICSDs")]   sowie   jeder
                    Funktionsnachfolger.
Im Fall von         [Die Schuldverschreibungen werden in Form einer New Global Note ("NGN")
Schuldverschrei-    ausgegeben und von einem common safekeeper im Namen beider ICSDs verwahrt.
bungen, die im
Namen der ICSDs     Der     Gesamtnennbetrag       der     durch    die    Globalurkunde     verbrieften
verwahrt werden,    Schuldverschreibungen entspricht dem jeweils in den Registern beider ICSDs
und die
Globalurkunde
                    eingetragenen Gesamtbetrag. Die Register der ICSDs (unter denen die Register zu
eine NGN ist, ist   verstehen sind, die jeder ICSD für seine Kunden über den Betrag ihres Anteils an den
Folgendes           Schuldverschreibungen führt) sind maßgeblicher Nachweis des Gesamtnennbetrages
anwendbar           der durch die Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen, und eine für zu
                    diesem Zweck von einem ICSD jeweils ausgestellte Bescheinigung mit dem Betrag
                    der so verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen ist maßgebliche Bescheinigung des Inhalts
                    des Registers des betreffenden ICSD zu dem fraglichen Zeitpunkt.
                    Bei jeder Tilgung oder einer Zinszahlung auf die durch die Globalurkunde verbrieften
                    Schuldverschreibungen bzw. beim Kauf und der Entwertung der durch die
                    Globalurkunde verbrieften Schuldverschreibungen stellt die Emittentin sicher, dass die
                    Einzelheiten der Rückzahlung, Zahlung oder des Kaufs und der Entwertung bezüglich
                    der Globalurkunde entsprechend in die Unterlagen der ICSDs eingetragen werden,
                    und dass nach dieser Eintragung vom Gesamtnennbetrag der in die Register der
                    ICSDs      aufgenommenen        und    durch     die    Globalurkunde      verbrieften
                    Schuldverschreibungen der Gesamtnennbetrag der zurückgekauften bzw. gekauften
                    und entwerteten Schuldverschreibungen abgezogen wird.
                    [Falls die vorläufige Globalurkunde eine NGN ist, ist Folgendes anwendbar: Bei
                    Austausch nur eines Teils von Schuldverschreibungen, die durch eine vorläufige
                    Globalurkunde verbrieft sind, wird die Emittentin sicherstellen, dass die Einzelheiten
                    dieses Austauschs entsprechend in die Register der ICSDs aufgenommen werden.]]

Im Fall von         [Die Schuldverschreibungen werden in Form einer Classical Global Note ("CGN")
Schuldverschrei-    ausgegeben und von einer gemeinsamen Verwahrstelle im Namen beider ICSDs
bungen, die im
Namen der ICSDs
                    verwahrt.]
verwahrt werden,
und die
Globalurkunde
eine CGN ist, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar

                    (5) Gläubiger von Schuldverschreibungen. "Gläubiger" bedeutet jeder Inhaber eines
                    Miteigentumsanteils    oder    anderen    vergleichbaren    Rechts     an     den
                    Schuldverschreibungen.



                                                     §2
                                 STATUS, NEGATIVVERPFLICHTUNG[, GARANTIE UND
                                     NEGATIVVERPFLICHTUNG DER GARANTIN]
                    (1) Status. Die Schuldverschreibungen begründen nicht besicherte und nicht
                    nachrangige Verbindlichkeiten der Emittentin, die untereinander und mit allen anderen
                    nicht besicherten und nicht nachrangigen Verbindlichkeiten der Emittentin gleichrangig
                    sind, soweit diesen Verbindlichkeiten nicht durch zwingende gesetzliche
                    Bestimmungen ein Vorrang eingeräumt wird.
                    (2) Negativverpflichtung.    Die    Emittentin    verpflichtet    sich,     solange
                    Schuldverschreibungen ausstehen, jedoch nur bis zu dem Zeitpunkt, an dem alle
                    Beträge an Kapital und Zinsen dem Fiscal Agent zur Verfügung gestellt worden sind,
                    keine gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeiten und keine
                    Garantien     oder    andere   Gewährleistungen    dafür    durch    Grund-    oder
                    Mobiliarpfandrechte an ihrem Vermögen zu besichern, ohne jeweils die Gläubiger zur
                    gleichen Zeit und im gleichen Rang an solchen Sicherheiten oder an solchen anderen
                    Sicherheiten, die von einem internationalen angesehenen unabhängigen
                    Wirtschaftsprüfer als gleichwertige Sicherheit anerkannt werden, teilnehmen zu
                    lassen.
                                                 136



                    "Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit" bezeichnet jede Verbindlichkeit hinsichtlich der
                    Rückzahlung aufgenommener Geldbeträge, die durch Schuldverschreibungen oder
                    sonstige Wertpapiere mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr, die
                    an einer Börse oder an einem anderen anerkannten Wertpapiermarkt notiert oder
                    gehandelt werden oder werden können, verbrieft oder verkörpert ist.
Im Fall von         [(3) Garantie und Negativverpflichtung der Garantin. BASF (die "Garantin") hat die
Schuldver-          unbedingte und unwiderrufliche Garantie (die "Garantie") für die ordnungsgemäße
schreibungen, die
von BASF Finance
                    und pünktliche Zahlung von Kapital und Zinsen und sonstiger auf die
begeben werden,     Schuldverschreibungen zahlbarer Beträge übernommen. Die Garantin hat sich
ist Folgendes       außerdem in einer Negativverpflichtung (die "Negativverpflichtung") verpflichtet,
anwendbar           solange Schuldverschreibungen ausstehen, jedoch nur bis zu dem Zeitpunkt, an dem
                    alle Beträge an Kapital und Zinsen dem Fiscal Agent zur Verfügung gestellt worden
                    sind, keine gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeiten (wie
                    vorstehend definiert) und keine Garantien oder andere Gewährleistungen dafür durch
                    Grund- oder Mobiliarpfandrechte an ihrem Vermögen zu besichern oder eine solche
                    Besicherung zu diesem Zweck bestehen zu lassen, ohne gleichzeitig die Gläubiger an
                    derselben Sicherheit oder an solchen anderen Sicherheiten, die von einem
                    internationalen angesehenen unabhängigen Wirtschaftsprüfer als gleichwertige
                    Sicherheit anerkannt werden, im gleichen Rang und gleichem Verhältnis teilnehmen
                    zu lassen. Die Garantie und die Negativverpflichtung stellen einen Vertrag zugunsten
                    jedes Gläubigers als begünstigtem Dritten gemäß § 328 BGB dar, welcher das Recht
                    jedes Gläubigers begründet, Erfüllung aus der Garantie und der Negativverpflichtung
                    unmittelbar von der Garantin zu verlangen und die Garantie und die
                    Negativverpflichtung unmittelbar gegen die Garantin durchzusetzen.]

                                                             §3
                                                           ZINSEN
                    (1) Zinszahlungstage.
                    (a) Die Schuldverschreibungen werden bezogen auf ihren Gesamtnennbetrag ab dem
                        [Verzinsungsbeginn] (der "Verzinsungsbeginn") (einschließlich) bis zum ersten
                        Zinszahlungstag (ausschließlich) und danach von jedem Zinszahlungstag
                        (einschließlich) bis zum nächstfolgenden Zinszahlungstag (ausschließlich) verzinst.
                        Zinsen auf die Schuldverschreibungen sind an jedem Zinszahlungstag zahlbar.
                    (b) "Zinszahlungstag" bedeutet
Im Fall von            [jeder [festgelegte Zinszahlungstage].]
festgelegten
Zinszahlungstagen
ist Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall von            [(soweit diese Anleihebedingungen keine abweichenden Bestimmungen vorsehen)
festgelegten           jeweils der Tag, der [Zahl] [Wochen] [Monate] nach dem vorhergehenden
Zinsperioden ist
Folgendes
                       Zinszahlungstag, oder im Fall des ersten Zinszahlungstages, nach dem
anwendbar              Verzinsungsbeginn liegt.]

                    (c) Fällt ein Zinszahlungstag auf einen Tag, der kein Geschäftstag (wie nachstehend
                        definiert) ist, so wird der Zinszahlungstag
Im Fall der            [auf den nächstfolgenden Geschäftstag verschoben, es sei denn, jener würde
modifizierten          dadurch in den nächsten Kalendermonat fallen; in diesem Fall wird der
folgender
Geschäftstag-
                       Zinszahlungstag auf den unmittelbar vorhergehenden Geschäftstag vorgezogen.]
Konvention ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall der FRN-        [auf den nächstfolgenden Geschäftstag verschoben, es sei denn, jener würde
Konvention ist          dadurch in den nächsten Kalendermonat fallen; in diesem Fall (i) wird der
Folgendes
anwendbar
                        Zinszahlungstag auf den unmittelbar vorhergehenden Geschäftstag vorgezogen
                        und (ii) ist jeder nachfolgende Zinszahlungstag der jeweils letzte Geschäftstag des
                        Monats, der [Zahl] Monate nach dem vorhergehenden anwendbaren
                        Zinszahlungstag liegt.]
                                                  137




Im Fall der             [auf den nachfolgenden Geschäftstag verschoben.]
folgender
Geschäftstag-
Konvention ist
Folgendes
anwendbar

                     (d) "Geschäftstag" bezeichnet
Falls die               [einen Tag (außer einem Samstag oder Sonntag), an dem Geschäftsbanken
festgelegte             allgemein für Geschäfte in [relevante(s) Finanzzentrum(en)] geöffnet sind und
Währung nicht
EUR ist, ist
                        Devisenmärkte Zahlungen in [relevantes Finanzzentrum(en)] abwickeln und an
Folgendes               dem das Clearing System geöffnet ist, um Zahlungen abzuwickeln.]
anwendbar


Falls die               [einen Tag (außer einem Samstag oder Sonntag) an dem das Clearing System
festgelegte             sowie alle betroffenen Bereiche des Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross
Währung EUR ist,
ist Folgendes
                        Settlement Express Transfer System 2 ("TARGET") geöffnet sind, um Zahlungen
anwendbar               abzuwickeln.]

Falls der            [(2) Zinssatz. Der Zinssatz (der "Zinssatz") für jede Zinsperiode (wie nachstehend
Angebotssatz für     definiert) wird, sofern nachstehend nichts Abweichendes bestimmt wird, durch die
Einlagen in der
festgelegten
                     Berechnungsstelle bestimmt und ist der Referenzsatz (wie nachstehend definiert)
Währung EURIBOR      [[zuzüglich] [abzüglich] der Marge (wie nachstehend definiert)]. Der anwendbare
ist, ist Folgendes   Referenzsatz ist der auf der Bildschirmseite am Zinsfestlegungstag (wie nachstehend
anwendbar            definiert) gegen 11.00 Uhr (Brüsseler Ortszeit) angezeigte Satz.
                     "Referenzsatz" bezeichnet den Angebotssatz, (ausgedrückt als Prozentsatz per
                     annum) für Einlagen in der festgelegten Währung für die jeweilige Zinsperiode
                     (EURIBOR).
                     "Zinsperiode" bezeichnet jeweils den Zeitraum vom Verzinsungsbeginn
                     (einschließlich) bis zum ersten Zinszahlungstag (ausschließlich) bzw. von jedem
                     Zinszahlungstag (einschließlich) bis zum jeweils darauffolgenden Zinszahlungstag
                     (ausschließlich).
                     "Zinsfestlegungstag" bezeichnet den zweiten TARGET Geschäftstag vor Beginn der
                     jeweiligen Zinsperiode. "TARGET-Geschäftstag" bezeichnet einen Tag, an dem alle
                     betroffenen Bereiche von TARGET (Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross
                     Settlement Express Transfer System 2) offen sind, um Zahlungen abzuwickeln.
                     [Die "Marge" beträgt [ ] % per annum.]
                     "Bildschirmseite" bedeutet Reuters Bildschirmseite EURIBOR01 oder die jeweilige
                     Nachfolgeseite, die vom selben System angezeigt wird oder aber von einem anderen
                     System, das zum Vertreiber von Informationen zum Zwecke der Anzeigen von Sätzen
                     oder Preisen ernannt wurde, die dem betreffenden Angebotssatz vergleichbar sind.
                     Sollte zu der genannten Zeit an dem betreffendne Zinsfestlegungstag die maßgebliche
                     Bildschirmseite nicht zur Verfügung stehen oder kein Angebotssatz angezeigt werden,
                     entspricht der Zinssatz an dem Zinsfestlegungstag dem Zinssatz, wie er auf der
                     Bildschirmseite an dem letzten Tag vor dem Zinsfestlegungstag angezeigt worden ist,
                     an dem ein solcher Zinssatz auf der Bildschirmseite angezeigt wurde [[zuzüglich]
                     [abzüglich] der Marge (wie vorstehend definiert)], wobei alle Festlegungen durch die
                     Berechnungsstelle erfolgen.
                     "Euro-Zone" bezeichnet das Gebiet derjenigen Mitgliedstaaten der Europäischen
                     Union, die gemäß dem Vertrag über die Gründung der Europäischen Gemeinschaft
                     (unterzeichnet in Rom am 25. März 1957), geändert durch den Vertrag über die
                     Europäische Union (unterzeichnet in Maastricht am 7. Februar 1992), den
                     Amsterdamer Vertrag vom 2. Oktober 1997 und den Vertrag von Lissabon vom 13.
                     Dezember 2007, in seiner jeweiligen Fassung, eine einheitliche Währung eingeführt
                     haben oder jeweils eingeführt haben werden.
                     "repräsentativer Betrag" bedeutet ein Betrag, der zu der jeweiligen Zeit in dem
                     jeweiligen Markt für eine einzelne Transaktion repräsentativ ist.
                                                           138



                         "Referenzbanken" bezeichnet vier Großbanken im Interbanken-Markt in der Euro-
                         Zone.]
                         (3) Zinsbetrag. Die Berechnungsstelle wird zu oder baldmöglichst nach jedem
                         Zeitpunkt, an dem der Zinssatz zu bestimmen ist, den auf die Schuldverschreibungen
                         zahlbaren Zinsbetrag in Bezug auf die festgelegte Stückelung (der "Zinsbetrag") für
                         die entsprechende Zinsperiode berechnen. Der Zinsbetrag wird ermittelt, indem der
                         Zinssatz und der Zinstagequotient (wie nachstehend definiert) auf die festgelegte
                         Stückelung angewendet werden, wobei der resultierende Betrag auf die kleinste
                         Einheit der festgelegten Währung auf- oder abgerundet wird, wobei 0,5 solcher
                         Einheiten aufgerundet werden.
                         (4) Mitteilung von Zinssatz und Zinsbetrag. Die Berechnungsstelle wird veranlassen,
                         dass der Zinssatz, der Zinsbetrag für die jeweilige Zinsperiode, die jeweilige
                         Zinsperiode und der betreffende Zinszahlungstag der Emittentin [Im Fall von
                         Schuldverschreibungen, die von BASF Finance begeben werden, ist Folgendes
                         anwendbar: und der Garantin] sowie den Gläubigern gemäß § 13 baldmöglichst, aber
                         keinesfalls später als am vierten auf die Berechnung jeweils folgenden [TARGET]
                         [relevante(s) Finanzzentrum(en)] Geschäftstag (wie in § 3 Absatz (2) definiert) sowie
                         jeder Börse, an der die betreffenden Schuldverschreibungen zu diesem Zeitpunkt
                         notiert sind und deren Regeln eine Mitteilung an die Börse verlangen, baldmöglichst
                         nach der Bestimmung, aber keinesfalls später als am ersten Tag der jeweiligen
                         Zinsperiode mitgeteilt werden. Im Fall einer Verlängerung oder Verkürzung der
                         Zinsperiode können der mitgeteilte Zinsbetrag und Zinszahlungstag ohne
                         Vorankündigung        nachträglich    geändert      (oder     andere       geeignete
                         Anpassungsregelungen getroffen) werden. Jede solche Änderung wird umgehend
                         allen Börsen, an denen die Schuldverschreibungen zu diesem Zeitpunkt notiert sind
                         und deren Regeln eine Mitteilung an die Börse verlangen, sowie den Gläubigern
                         gemäß § 13 mitgeteilt.
                         (5) Verbindlichkeit der Festsetzungen. Alle Bescheinigungen, Mitteilungen, Gutachten,
                         Festsetzungen, Berechnungen, Quotierungen und Entscheidungen, die von der
                         Berechnungsstelle für die Zwecke dieses § 3 gemacht, abgegeben, getroffen oder
                         eingeholt werden, sind (sofern nicht ein offensichtlicher Irrtum vorliegt) für die
                         Emittentin, den Fiscal Agent, die Zahlstellen und die Gläubiger bindend.
                         (6) Auflaufende Zinsen. Sollte die Emittentin die Schuldverschreibungen bei Fälligkeit
                         nicht einlösen, endet die Verzinsung der Schuldverschreibungen nicht am
                         Fälligkeitstag,  sondern     erst   mit    der    tatsächlichen   Rückzahlung     der
                         Schuldverschreibungen. Der jeweils geltende Zinssatz ist der gesetzlich festgelegte
                         Satz für Verzugszinsen.(1)
                         (7) Zinstagequotient. "Zinstagequotient" bezeichnet im Hinblick auf die Berechnung
                         eines Zinsbetrages auf eine Schuldverschreibung für einen beliebigen Zeitraum (der
                         "Zinsberechnungszeitraum"):
Im Fall von              [die tatsächliche Anzahl von Tagen im Zinsberechnungszeitraum, dividiert durch 365.]
Actual/365 (Fixed)
ist Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall von              [die tatsächliche Anzahl von Tagen im Zinsberechnungszeitraum, dividiert durch 360.]
Actual/360 ist
Folgendes
anwendbar

                         (8) (a) Ersatzrate. Stellt die Emittenin (in Abstimmung mit der Berechnungstelle) fest,
                         dass vor oder an einem Zinsfestlegungstag ein Ersatzrate-Ereignis eingetreten ist,
                         wird die Jeweilige Festlegende Stelle (i) die Ersatzrate, (ii) die etwaige
                         Anpassungsspanne und (iii) die Ersatzrate-Anpassungen (wie jeweils in § 3(8)(b)(aa)
                         bis (cc) und (hh) definiert) zur Bestimmung des Zinssatzes für die auf den
                         Zinsfestlegungstag bezogene Zinsperiode und jede nachfolgende Zinsperiode
                         (vorbehaltlich des nachfolgenden Eintretens etwaiger weiterer Ersatzrate-Ereignisse)
                         festlegen und rechtzeitig die Emittentin, sofern relevant, und die Berechnungsstelle


(1)   Der gesetzliche Verzugszinssatz beträgt für das Jahr fünf Prozentpunkte über dem von der Deutsche Bundesbank von Zeit
      zu Zeit veröffentlichten Basiszinssatz, §§ 288 Absatz 1, 247 Absatz 1 BGB.
                               139


darüber informieren. Die Anleihebedingungen gelten mit Wirkung ab dem relevanten
Zinsfestlegungstag (einschließlich) als durch die Ersatzrate-Anpassungen geändert
(einschließlich einer etwaigen Änderung dieses Zinsfestlegungstags, falls die
Ersatzrate-Anpassungen dies so bestimmen). Der Zinssatz ist dann die Ersatzrate
(wie nachfolgend definiert) angepasst durch die etwaige Anpassungsspanne
[[zuzüglich] [abzüglich] der Marge (wie vorstehend definiert)].
Die Emittentin wird den Gläubigern die Ersatzrate, die etwaige Anpassungsspanne
und die Ersatzrate-Anpassungen unverzüglich nach einer solchen Festlegung gemäß
§ 13 mitteilen. Darüber hinaus wird die Emittentin [das Clearing System] [die
gemeinsame Verwahrstelle im Namen beider ICSDs] auffordern, die
Anleihebedingungen zu ergänzen, um die Ersatzrate-Anpassungen wiederzugeben,
indem sie der Globalurkunde die durch sie vorgelegten Dokumente in geeigneter
Weise beifügt.
(b) Definitionen.
   (aa) "Ersatzrate-Ereignis" bezeichnet in Bezug auf den Referenzsatz eines der
        nachfolgenden Ereignisse:
        (i)    der Referenzsatz wurde an zehn (10) aufeinanderfolgenden
               Geschäftstagen unmittelbar vor dem relevanten Zinsfestlegungstag nicht
               veröffentlicht; oder
        (ii)   der Eintritt des durch die für den Administrator des Referenzsatzes
               zuständigen Behörde öffentlich bekannt gegebenen Tages bzw. des auf
               Grundlage der öffentlichen Bekanntmachung bestimmbaren Tages, an
               dem der Referenzsatz den zugrundeliegenden Markt oder die zugrunde
               liegende wirtschaftliche Realität nicht mehr abbildet und von der für den
               Administrator des Referenzsatzes zuständigen Behörde keine
               Maßnahmen zur Behebung dieser Situation ergriffen wurden bzw. solche
               nicht erwartet werden; oder
        (iii) der Eintritt des durch den Administrator des Referenzsatzes öffentlich
              bekannt gegebenen Tages bzw. des auf Grundlage der öffentlichen
              Bekanntmachung bestimmbaren Tages, an dem der Administrator (x)
              damit beginnen wird, den Referenzsatz in geordneter Weise abzuwickeln
              oder (y) die Veröffentlichung des Referenzsatzes dauerhaft oder auf
              unbestimmte Zeit beendet (wenn kein Nachfolgeadministrator ernannt
              worden ist, der die Veröffentlichung des Referenzsatzes fortsetzen wird);
              oder
        (iv) der Eintritt des durch die für den Administrator des Referenzsatzes
             zuständigen Behörde, die Zentralbank für die festgelegte Währung,
             einen Insolvenzbeauftragten mit Zuständigkeit über den Administrator
             des Referenzsatzes, die Abwicklungsbehörde mit Zuständigkeit über den
             Administrator des Referenzsatzes, ein Gericht (rechtskräftige
             Entscheidung) oder eine Organisation mit ähnlicher insolvenz- oder
             abwicklungsrechtlicher    Hoheit    über     den    Administrator des
             Referenzsatzes (x) damit beginnen wird, den Referenzsatz in geordneter
             Weise abzuwickeln oder (y) öffentlich bekannt gegebenen Tages, an
             dem der Administrator des Referenzsatzes die Bereitstellung des
             Referenzsatzes dauerhaft oder auf unbestimmte Zeit beendet hat oder
             beenden wird (wenn kein Nachfolgeadministrator ernannt worden ist, der
             die Veröffentlichung des Referenzsatzes fortsetzen wird); oder
        (v) der Eintritt des durch die für den Administrator des Referenzsatzes
             zuständigen Behörde öffentlich bekannt gegebenen Tages bzw. des auf
             Grundlage der öffentlichen Bekanntmachung bestimmbaren Tages, von
             dem an die Nutzung des Referenzsatzes allgemein verboten ist; oder
        (vi) der Eintritt des durch den Administrator des Referenzsatzes öffentlich
              bekannt gegebenen Tages bzw. des auf Grundlage der öffentlichen
              Bekanntmachung bestimmbaren Tages, einer materiellen Änderung der
              Methode mittels derer der Referenzsatz festgelegt wird; oder
        (vii) die Veröffentlichung einer Mitteilung durch die Emittentin gemäß § 13(1),
               dass die Verwendung des Referenzsatzes zur Berechnung des
                              140


              Zinssatzes für die Emittentin, die Berechnungsstelle oder eine Zahlstelle
              rechtswidrig geworden ist; oder
       (viii) die Europäische Kommission oder die zuständige nationale Behörde
              eines Mitgliedstaats haben einen oder mehrere Ersatz-Referenzwerte für
              einen Referenzsatz gemäß Art. 23b (2) und Art. 23c(1) der Verordnung
              (EU) 2016/1011 vom 8. Juni 2016 über Indizes, die bei
              Finanzinstrumenten und Finanzkontrakten als Referenzwert oder zur
              Messung der Wertentwicklung eines Investmentfonds verwendet werden,
              bestimmt.
(bb) "Ersatzrate" bezeichnet eine öffentlich verfügbare Austausch-, Nachfolge-,
     Alternativ- oder andere Rate, welche entwickelt wurde, um durch
     Finanzinstrumente          oder     –kontrakte,       einschließlich      der
     Schuldverschreibungen, in Bezug genommen zu werden, um einen unter
     solchen Finanzinstrumenten oder –kontrakten zahlbaren Betrag zu
     bestimmen, einschließlich aber nicht ausschließlich eines Zinsbetrages. Bei
     der Festlegung der Ersatzrate sind die Relevanten Leitlinien (wie nachstehend
     definiert) zu berücksichtigen.
(cc) "Anpassungsspanne" bezeichnet die Differenz (positiv oder negativ) oder
     eine Formel oder Methode zur Bestimmung einer solchen Differenz, welche
     nach Festlegung der Jeweiligen Festlegenden Stelle auf die Ersatzrate
     anzuwenden ist, um eine Verlagerung des wirtschaftlichen Wertes zwischen
     der Emittentin und den Gläubigern, die ohne diese Anpassung infolge der
     Ersetzung des Referenzsatzes durch die Ersatzrate entstehen würde
     (einschließlich aber nicht ausschließlich infolgedessen, dass die Ersatzrate
     eine risikofreie Rate ist), soweit sinnvollerweise möglich, zu reduzieren oder
     auszuschließen. Bei der Festlegung der Anpassungsspanne sind die
     Relevanten Leitlinien (wie nachstehend definiert) zu berücksichtigen.
(dd) "Jeweilige Festlegende Stelle" bezeichnet
       (i)    die Emittentin, wenn die Ersatzrate ihrer Meinung nach offensichtlich ist
              und als solches ohne vernünftigen Zweifel durch einen Investor, der
              hinsichtlich der jeweiligen Art von Schuldverschreibungen, wie
              beispielsweise    diese    Schuldverschreibungen,    sachkundig      ist,
              bestimmbar ist; oder
       (ii)   andernfalls ein Unabhängiger Berater (wie nachfolgend definiert), der
              von der Emittentin zu wirtschaftlich angemessenen Bedingungen unter
              zumutbaren Bemühungen als ihr Beauftragter für die Vornahme dieser
              Festlegungen ernannt wird.
(ee) "Unabhängiger Berater" bezeichnet ein unabhängiges, international
     angesehenes Finanzinstitut oder einen anderen unabhängigen Finanzberater
     mit entsprechender Erfahrung im internationalen Kapitalmarkt.
(ff)   "Relevante Leitlinien" bezeichnet (i) jede auf die Emittentin oder die
       Schuldverschreibungen anwendbare gesetzliche oder aufsichtsrechtliche
       Anforderung, oder, wenn es keine gibt, (ii) jede anwendbare Anforderung,
       Empfehlung oder Leitlinie der Relevanten Nominierungsstelle oder, wenn es
       keine gibt, (iii) jede relevante Empfehlung oder Leitlinie von
       Branchenvereinigungen (einschließlich ISDA), oder wenn es keine gibt, (iv)
       jede relevante Marktpraxis.
(gg) "Relevante Nominierungsstelle" bezeichnet
       (i)    die Zentralbank für die festgelegte Währung oder eine Zentralbank oder
              andere Aufsichtsbehörde, die für die Aufsicht über den Referenzsatz
              oder den Administrator des Referenzsatzes zuständig ist; oder
       (ii)   die Europäische Kommission oder jede zuständige nationale Behörde
              eines Mitgliedstaates; oder
       (iii) jede Arbeitsgruppe oder jeder Ausschuss, befürwortet, unterstützt oder
             einberufen durch oder unter dem Vorsitz von bzw. mitgeleitet durch (w)
             die Zentralbank für die festgelegte Währung, (x) eine Zentralbank oder
             andere Aufsichtsbehörde, die für die Aufsicht über den Referenzsatz
                                                 141


                                 oder den Administrator des Referenzsatzes zuständig ist, (y) einer
                                 Gruppe der zuvor genannten Zentralbanken oder anderen
                                 Aufsichtsbehörden oder (z) den Finanzstabilitätsrat (Financial Stability
                                 Board) oder einem Teil davon.
                       (hh) "Ersatzrate-Anpassungen"         bezeichnet    solche   Anpassungen     der
                            Anleihebedingungen, die als folgerichtig festgelegt werden, um die Funktion
                            der Ersatzrate zu ermöglichen (wovon unter anderem Anpassungen an der
                            anwendbaren Geschäftstagekonvention, der Definition von Geschäftstag, am
                            Zinsfestlegungstag, am Zinstagequotient oder jeder Methode oder Definition,
                            um die Ersatzrate zu erhalten oder zu berechnen, erfasst sein können). Bei
                            der Festlegung der Ersatzrate-Anpassungen sind die Relevanten Leitlinien
                            (wie vorstehend definiert) zu berücksichtigen.
                    (c) Kündigung. Können eine Ersatzrate, eine etwaige Anpassungsspanne oder die
                        Ersatzrate-Anpassungen nicht gemäß § 3(8)(a) und (b) bestimmt werden, ist der
                        Referenzsatz in Bezug auf den relevanten Zinsfestlegungstag der für die zuletzt
                        vorangehende Zinsperiode bestimmte Referenzsatz. Die Emittentin wird die
                        Berechnungsstelle entsprechend informieren. Infolgedessen kann die Emittentin
                        die Schuldverschreibungen an jedem Geschäftstag vor dem jeweiligen
                        nachfolgenden Zinsfestlegungstag jederzeit insgesamt, jedoch nicht teilweise, mit
                        einer Kündigungsfrist von nicht weniger als 15 Tagen gemäß § 13 gegenüber den
                        Gläubigern vorzeitig kündigen und zu ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag zuzüglich bis zum
                        für die Rückzahlung festgesetzten Tag aufgelaufener Zinsen zurückzahlen.

                                                           §4
                                                       ZAHLUNGEN
                    (1) (a) Zahlungen auf Kapital. Zahlungen auf Kapital in Bezug auf die
                    Schuldverschreibungen erfolgen nach Maßgabe des nachstehenden Absatzes (2) an
                    das Clearing System oder dessen Order zur Gutschrift auf den Konten der jeweiligen
                    Kontoinhaber des Clearing Systems.
                    (b) Zahlung von Zinsen. Die Zahlung von Zinsen auf Schuldverschreibungen erfolgt
                    nach Maßgabe von Absatz (2) an das Clearing System oder dessen Order zur
                    Gutschrift auf den Konten der jeweiligen Kontoinhaber des Clearing Systems.
Im Fall von         [Die Zahlung von Zinsen auf Schuldverschreibungen, die durch die vorläufige
Zinszahlungen auf   Globalurkunde verbrieft sind, erfolgt nach Maßgabe von Absatz (2) an das Clearing
eine vorläufige
Globalurkunde ist
                    System oder dessen Order zur Gutschrift auf den Konten der jeweiligen Kontoinhaber
Folgendes           des Clearing Systems, und zwar nach ordnungsgemäßer Bescheinigung gemäß § 1
anwendbar           Absatz (3)(b).]
                    (2) Zahlungsweise. Vorbehaltlich (i) geltender steuerlicher und sonstiger gesetzlicher
                    Regelungen und Vorschriften und (ii) eines Einbehalts oder Abzugs aufgrund eines
                    Vertrags wie in Section 1471(b) des U.S. Internal Revenue Code von 1986 (der
                    "Code") beschrieben bzw. anderweit gemäß Section 1471 bis Section 1474 des Code
                    auferlegt, etwaigen aufgrund dessen getroffener Regelungen oder geschlossener
                    Abkommen, etwaiger offizieller Auslegungen davon, oder von Gesetzen zur
                    Umsetzung einer Regierungszusammenarbeit dazu erfolgen zu leistende Zahlungen
                    auf die Schuldverschreibungen in der festgelegten Währung.
                    (3) Erfüllung. Die Emittentin wird durch Leistung der Zahlung an das Clearing System
                    oder dessen Order von ihrer Zahlungspflicht befreit.
                    (4) Zahltag. Fällt der Fälligkeitstag einer Zahlung in Bezug auf eine
                    Schuldverschreibung auf einen Tag, der kein Zahltag ist, dann hat der Gläubiger
                    keinen Anspruch auf Zahlung vor dem nächsten Zahltag am jeweiligen Geschäftsort.
                    Der Gläubiger ist nicht berechtigt, weitere Zinsen oder sonstige Zahlungen aufgrund
                    dieser Verspätung zu verlangen.
                    Für diese Zwecke bezeichnet "Zahltag" einen Tag, der ein Geschäftstag ist.
                    (5) Bezugnahmen auf Kapital und Zinsen. Bezugnahmen in diesen
                    Anleihebedingungen auf Kapital der Schuldverschreibungen schließen, soweit
                    anwendbar, die folgenden Beträge ein: den Rückzahlungsbetrag der
                    Schuldverschreibungen; sowie jeden Aufschlag sowie sonstige auf oder in Bezug auf
                    die Schuldverschreibungen zahlbaren Beträge. Bezugnahmen in diesen
                                                142


                   Anleihebedingungen auf Zinsen auf die Schuldverschreibungen sollen, soweit
                   anwendbar, sämtliche gemäß § 7 zahlbaren zusätzlichen Beträge einschließen.
                   (6) Hinterlegung von Kapital und Zinsen. Die Emittentin ist berechtigt, beim
                   Amtsgericht Frankfurt am Main, Bundesrepublik Deutschland, Zins- oder
                   Kapitalbeträge zu hinterlegen, die von den Gläubigern nicht innerhalb von zwölf
                   Monaten nach dem Fälligkeitstag beansprucht worden sind, auch wenn die Gläubiger
                   sich nicht in Annahmeverzug befinden. Soweit eine solche Hinterlegung erfolgt, und
                   auf das Recht der Rücknahme verzichtet wird, erlöschen die diesbezüglichen
                   Ansprüche der Gläubiger gegen die Emittentin.

                                                           §5
                                                      RÜCKZAHLUNG
                   (1) Rückzahlung bei Endfälligkeit. Soweit nicht zuvor bereits ganz oder teilweise
                   zurückgezahlt oder angekauft und entwertet, werden die Schuldverschreibungen zu
                   ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag am in den [Rückzahlungsmonat] fallenden
                   Zinszahlungstag (der "Fälligkeitstag") zurückgezahlt. Der "Rückzahlungsbetrag" in
                   Bezug auf jede Schuldverschreibung entspricht dem Nennbetrag der
                   Schuldverschreibung.
Im Fall von        [(2) Vorzeitige Rückzahlung aus steuerlichen Gründen. Die Schuldverschreibungen
Schuldverschrei-   können insgesamt, jedoch nicht teilweise, nach Wahl der Emittentin mit einer
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   Kündigungsfrist von nicht weniger als 30 Tagen und nicht mehr als 60 Tagen
werden, ist        gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent und gemäß § 13 gegenüber den Gläubigern vorzeitig
Folgendes          gekündigt und zu ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag zuzüglich bis zum für die Rückzahlung
anwendbar          festgesetzten Tag aufgelaufener Zinsen zurückgezahlt werden, falls die Emittentin als
                   Folge einer Änderung oder Ergänzung der Steuer- oder Abgabengesetze und -
                   vorschriften     der   Bundesrepublik     Deutschland     oder   deren     politischen
                   Untergliederungen oder Steuerbehörden oder als Folge einer Änderung oder
                   Ergänzung der Anwendung oder der offiziellen Auslegung dieser Gesetze und
                   Vorschriften (vorausgesetzt, diese Änderung oder Ergänzung wird am oder nach dem
                   Tag, an dem die letzte Tranche dieser Serie von Schuldverschreibungen begeben
                   wird, wirksam) am nächstfolgenden Zinszahlungstag (wie in § 3 Absatz (1) definiert)
                   zur Zahlung von zusätzlichen Beträgen (wie in § 7 dieser Bedingungen definiert)
                   verpflichtet sein wird und diese Verpflichtung nicht durch das Ergreifen vernünftiger,
                   der Emittentin zur Verfügung stehender Maßnahmen vermieden werden kann.
                   Eine solche Kündigung darf allerdings nicht (i) früher als 90 Tage vor dem frühest
                   möglichen Termin erfolgen, an dem die Emittentin verpflichtet wäre, solche
                   zusätzlichen Beträge zu zahlen, falls eine Zahlung auf die Schuldverschreibungen
                   dann fällig sein würde, oder (ii) erfolgen, wenn zu dem Zeitpunkt, in dem die
                   Kündigungsmitteilung erfolgt, die Verpflichtung zur Zahlung von zusätzlichen Beträgen
                   nicht mehr wirksam ist. Der für die Rückzahlung festgelegte Termin muss ein
                   Zinszahlungstag sein.]

Im Fall von        [(2) Vorzeitige Rückzahlung aus steuerlichen Gründen. Die Schuldverschreibungen
Schuldverschrei-   können insgesamt, jedoch nicht teilweise, nach Wahl der Emittentin mit einer
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   Kündigungsfrist von nicht weniger als 30 Tagen und nicht mehr als 60 Tagen
begeben werden,    gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent und gemäß § 13 gegenüber den Gläubigern vorzeitig
ist Folgendes      gekündigt und zu ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag zuzüglich bis zum für die Rückzahlung
anwendbar          festgesetzten Tag aufgelaufener Zinsen zurückgezahlt werden, falls die Emittentin
                   oder die Garantin als Folge einer Änderung oder Ergänzung der Steuer- oder
                   Abgabengesetze und -vorschriften der Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder der
                   Niederlande oder deren politischen Untergliederungen oder Steuerbehörden oder als
                   Folge einer Änderung oder Ergänzung der Anwendung oder der offiziellen Auslegung
                   dieser Gesetze und Vorschriften (vorausgesetzt, diese Änderung oder Ergänzung
                   wird am oder nach dem Tag, an dem die letzte Tranche dieser Serie von
                   Schuldverschreibungen      begeben      wird,    wirksam)      am     nächstfolgenden
                   Zinszahlungstag (wie in § 3 Absatz (1) definiert) zur Zahlung von zusätzlichen
                   Beträgen (wie in § 7 dieser Bedingungen definiert) verpflichtet sein wird und diese
                   Verpflichtung nicht durch das Ergreifen vernünftiger, der Emittentin oder der Garantin
                   zur Verfügung stehender Maßnahmen vermieden werden kann.
                   Eine solche Kündigung darf allerdings nicht (i) früher als 90 Tage vor dem frühest
                                                  143


                     möglichen Termin erfolgen, an dem die Emittentin oder die Garantin verpflichtet wäre,
                     solche zusätzlichen Beträge zu zahlen, falls eine Zahlung auf die
                     Schuldverschreibungen dann fällig sein würde, oder (ii) erfolgen, wenn zu dem
                     Zeitpunkt, in dem die Kündigungsmitteilung erfolgt, die Verpflichtung zur Zahlung von
                     zusätzlichen Beträgen nicht mehr wirksam ist. Der für die Rückzahlung festgelegte
                     Termin muss ein Zinszahlungstag sein.]
                     Eine solche Kündigung hat gemäß § 13 zu erfolgen. Sie ist unwiderruflich, muss den
                     für die Rückzahlung festgelegten Termin nennen und eine zusammenfassende
                     Erklärung enthalten, welche die das Rückzahlungsrecht der Emittentin begründenden
                     Umständen darlegt.
Falls die            [(3) Kontrollwechsel. Tritt ein Kontrollwechsel ein und kommt es innerhalb des
Gläubiger das        Kontrollwechselzeitraums zu einer Absenkung des Ratings auf Grund des
Wahlrecht haben,
die Schuldver-
                     Kontrollwechsels (zusammen, ein "Rückzahlungsereignis"), hat jeder Gläubiger das
schreibungen         Recht (sofern nicht die Emittentin, bevor die nachstehend beschriebene
vorzeitig aufgrund   Rückzahlungsmitteilung gemacht wird, die Rückzahlung der Schuldverschreibungen
eines                nach § 5 Absatz (2) angezeigt hat), die Rückzahlung seiner Schuldverschreibungen
Kontrollwechsels     durch die Emittentin zum Nennbetrag, zuzüglich aufgelaufener Zinsen bis zum
zu kündigen, ist
                     Rückzahlungstag (ausschließlich), zu verlangen.
Folgendes
anwendbar            Für Zwecke dieses Wahlrechts:
                     Bedeutet "Ratingagentur" jede Ratingagentur von S&P Global Ratings Europe
                     Limited ("S&P"), Moody's Deutschland GmbH ("Moody's") und Fitch Ratings Ireland
                     Limited ("Fitch") oder eine ihrer jeweiligen Nachfolgegesellschaften oder jede andere
                     von BASF von Zeit zu Zeit bestimmte Ratingagentur vergleichbaren internationalen
                     Ansehens;
                     Gilt eine "Absenkung des Ratings" in Bezug auf einen Kontrollwechsel als
                     eingetreten, wenn innerhalb des Kontrollwechselzeitraums ein vorher für BASF oder
                     die Schuldverschreibungen vergebenes Rating einer Ratingagentur (i) zurückgezogen
                     oder (ii) von einem Investment Grade Rating (BBB- von S&P und Fitch/Baa3 von
                     Moody's oder jeweils gleichwertig, oder besser) in ein non-Investment Grade Rating
                     (BB+ von S&P und Fitch/Ba1 von Moody's oder jeweils gleichwertig, oder schlechter)
                     geändert wird;
                     Gilt ein "Kontrollwechsel" jedes Mal als eingetreten, wenn eine Person oder mehrere
                     Personen (die "relevante(n) Person(en)"), die im Sinne von § 30 Absatz 2 des
                     Wertpapiererwerbs- und Übernahmegesetzes (WpÜG) abgestimmt handeln, oder ein
                     oder mehrere Dritte(r), die im Auftrag der relevanten Person(en) handeln, zu
                     irgendeiner Zeit mittelbar oder unmittelbar (unabhängig davon, ob der Vorstand oder
                     der Aufsichtsrat der BASF seine Zustimmung erteilt hat) eine solche Anzahl von
                     Aktien der BASF hält bzw. halten oder erworben hat bzw. haben, auf die mehr als
                     50% der Stimmrechte entfallen;
                     Ist der "Kontrollwechselzeitraum" der Zeitraum, der 120 Tage nach dem Eintritt
                     eines Kontrollwechsels endet; und
                     Ist der "Rückzahlungstag" der fünfzehnte Tag nach dem letzten Tag des
                     Ausübungszeitraums.
                     Sofort nachdem die Emittentin von einem Rückzahlungsereignis Kenntnis erlangt,
                     wird sie den Gläubigern gemäß § 13 Mitteilung vom Rückzahlungsereignis machen
                     (eine "Rückzahlungsmitteilung"), in der die Umstände des Rückzahlungsereignisses
                     sowie das Verfahren für die Ausübung des in diesem § 5 Absatz (3) genannten
                     Wahlrechts angegeben sind.
                     Um dieses Wahlrecht auszuüben, hat der Gläubiger innerhalb eines Zeitraums von 45
                     Tagen       nachdem     die   Rückzahlungsmitteilung      veröffentlicht  ist    (der
                     "Ausübungszeitraum"), an die bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle des Fiscal Agent eine
                     Mitteilung zur vorzeitigen Rückzahlung in Textform (z.B. eMail oder Fax) oder in
                     schriftlicher   Form     ("Ausübungserklärung")       zu    schicken.    Falls    die
                     Ausübungserklärung nach 17:00 Uhr Frankfurter Zeit am 45. Tag nach
                     Veröffentlichung der Rückzahlungsmitteilung eingeht, ist das Wahlrecht nicht wirksam
                     ausgeübt. Die Ausübungserklärung hat anzugeben: (i) den gesamten Nennbetrag der
                     Schuldverschreibungen, für die das Wahlrecht ausgeübt wird und (ii) die
                     Wertpapierkennnummern dieser Schuldverschreibungen (soweit vergeben). Für die
                                                    144


                      Ausübungserklärung kann ein Formblatt, wie es bei den bezeichneten
                      Geschäftsstellen des Fiscal Agent in deutscher und englischer Sprache erhältlich ist
                      und das weitere Hinweise enthält, verwendet werden. Die Ausübung des Wahlrechts
                      kann nicht widerrufen werden. Die Rückzahlung der Schuldverschreibungen, für
                      welche das Wahlrecht ausgeübt worden ist, erfolgt nur gegen Lieferung der
                      Schuldverschreibungen an die Emittentin oder deren Order.]


Falls die             [[(4)] Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin.
Emittentin das
Wahlrecht hat, die    (a) Die Emittentin kann, nachdem sie gemäß Absatz (b) gekündigt hat, die
Schuldver-                Schuldverschreibungen insgesamt oder teilweise am [Zahl] Jahre nach dem
schreibungen              Verzinsungsbeginn folgenden Zinszahlungstag [Für den Fall, dass die
vorzeitig zu
festgelegten Wahl-        Schuldverschreibungen auch zu jedem darauffolgenden Zinszahlungstag
Rückzahlungsbeträ         gekündigt werden können, ist folgendes anwendbar: und danach an jedem
gen (Call)                darauf folgenden Zinszahlungstag] ([jeder ein] [der] "Wahl-Rückzahlungstag
zurückzuzahlen, ist       (Call)") zum/zu den Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag/beträgen (Call), wie nachstehend
Folgendes                 angegeben, nebst etwaigen bis zum jeweiligen Wahl-Rückzahlungstag (Call)
anwendbar
                          (ausschließlich) aufgelaufenen Zinsen zurückzahlen.
                      [Wahl-Rückzahlungstag[e]]           [Wahl-Rückzahlungs[betrag][beträge]


                      [                               ] [                                  ]
                      [                               ] [                                  ]
                      (b) Die Kündigung ist den Gläubigern der Schuldverschreibungen durch die Emittentin
                          gemäß § 13 bekannt zu geben. Sie beinhaltet die folgenden Angaben:
                          (i) die zurückzuzahlende Serie von Schuldverschreibungen;
                          (ii) eine Erklärung, ob diese Serie ganz oder teilweise zurückgezahlt wird und im
                               letzteren   Fall    den    Gesamtnennbetrag        der    zurückzuzahlenden
                               Schuldverschreibungen; und
                          (iii) den Wahl-Rückzahlungstag (Call), der nicht weniger als 30 Tage und nicht
                                mehr als 60 Tage nach dem Tag der Kündigung durch die Emittentin
                                gegenüber den Gläubigern liegen darf.
                      (c) Wenn die Schuldverschreibungen nur teilweise zurückgezahlt werden, werden die
                          zurückzuzahlenden Schuldverschreibungen in Übereinstimmung mit den Regeln
                          des     betreffenden   Clearing    Systems       ausgewählt.    [Falls    die
                          Schuldverschreibungen in Form einer NGN begeben werden, ist Folgendes
                          anwendbar: Die teilweise Rückzahlung wird in den Registern von CBL und
                          Euroclear nach deren Ermessen entweder als Pool-Faktor oder als Reduzierung
                          des Gesamtnennbetrags wiedergegeben.]]

                                                           §6
                                        DER FISCAL AGENT, DIE ZAHLSTELLE UND DIE
                                                  BERECHNUNGSSTELLE
                      (1) Bestellung; bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle. Der anfänglich bestellte Fiscal Agent, die
                      anfänglich bestellte Zahlstelle und die anfänglich bestellte Berechnungsstelle und
                      deren bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle lauten wie folgt:
                      Fiscal Agent            Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
                      und Zahlstelle:         Trust & Agency Services
                                              Taunusanlage 12
                                              60325 Frankfurt am Main
                                              Bundesrepublik Deutschland
                      Berechnungsstelle:      [Namen und bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle]
                      Der Fiscal Agent, die Zahlstelle und die Berechnungsstelle behalten sich das Recht
                      vor, jederzeit ihre bezeichneten Geschäftsstellen durch eine andere bezeichnete
                      Geschäftsstelle in demselben Land zu ersetzen.
                      (2) Änderung der Bestellung oder Abberufung. Die Emittentin behält sich das Recht
                                                 145


                   vor, jederzeit die Bestellung des Fiscal Agents oder einer Zahlstelle oder der
                   Berechnungsstelle zu ändern oder zu beenden und einen anderen Fiscal Agent oder
                   zusätzliche oder andere Zahlstellen oder eine andere Berechnungsstelle zu bestellen.
                   Die Emittentin wird zu jedem Zeitpunkt [(i)] einen Fiscal Agent unterhalten [Im Fall
                   von Zahlungen in U.S. Dollar ist Folgendes anwendbar:, (ii) falls Zahlungen bei
                   den oder durch die Geschäftsstellen aller Zahlstellen außerhalb der Vereinigten
                   Staaten (wie unten definiert) aufgrund der Einführung von Devisenbeschränkungen
                   oder ähnlichen Beschränkungen hinsichtlich der vollständigen Zahlung oder des
                   Empfangs der entsprechenden Beträge in U.S. Dollar widerrechtlich oder tatsächlich
                   ausgeschlossen werden, eine Zahlstelle mit bezeichneter Geschäftsstelle in New York
                   City unterhalten] [,] [und] [(iii)] eine Berechnungsstelle unterhalten. Eine Änderung,
                   Abberufung, Bestellung oder ein sonstiger Wechsel wird nur wirksam (außer im
                   Insolvenzfall, in dem eine solche Änderung sofort wirksam wird), sofern die Gläubiger
                   hierüber gemäß § 13 vorab unter Einhaltung einer Frist von mindestens 30 Tagen und
                   nicht mehr als 45 Tagen informiert wurden. Für die Zwecke dieser
                   Anleihebedingungen bezeichnet "Vereinigte Staaten" die Vereinigten Staaten von
                   Amerika (einschließlich deren Bundesstaaten und des District of Columbia) sowie
                   deren Territorien (einschließlich Puerto Ricos, der U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam,
                   American Samoa, Wake Island und Northern Mariana Islands).
                   (3) Erfüllungsgehilfe(n) der Emittentin. Der Fiscal Agent, die Zahlstelle und die
                   Berechnungsstelle handeln ausschließlich als Erfüllungsgehilfen der Emittentin und
                   übernehmen keinerlei Verpflichtungen gegenüber den Gläubigern und es wird kein
                   Auftrags- oder Treuhandverhältnis zwischen ihnen und den Gläubigern begründet.

                                                            §7
                                                         STEUERN
Im Fall von        [Sämtliche auf die Schuldverschreibungen zu zahlenden Beträge sind ohne Einbehalt
Schuldverschrei-   oder Abzug von oder aufgrund von gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen Steuern oder
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   sonstigen Abgaben gleich welcher Art zu leisten, die von oder in der Bundesrepublik
werden, ist        Deutschland oder für deren Rechnung oder von oder für Rechnung einer politischen
Folgendes          Untergliederung oder Steuerbehörde der oder in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
anwendbar          auferlegt oder erhoben werden, es sei denn, ein solcher Einbehalt oder Abzug ist
                   gesetzlich vorgeschrieben. Ist ein solcher Einbehalt gesetzlich vorgeschrieben, so wird
                   die Emittentin diejenigen zusätzlichen Beträge (die "zusätzlichen Beträge") zahlen,
                   die erforderlich sind, damit die den Gläubigern zufließenden Nettobeträge nach
                   diesem Einbehalt oder Abzug jeweils den Beträgen entsprechen, die ohne einen
                   solchen Einbehalt oder Abzug von den Gläubigern empfangen worden wären; die
                   Verpflichtung zur Zahlung solcher zusätzlicher Beträge besteht jedoch nicht im
                   Hinblick auf Steuern und Abgaben, die:
                   (a) von einer als Depotbank oder Inkassobeauftragter des Gläubigers handelnden
                       Person oder sonst auf andere Weise zu entrichten sind als dadurch, dass die
                       Emittentin aus den von ihr zu leistenden Zahlungen von Kapital oder Zinsen einen
                       Abzug oder Einbehalt vornimmt; oder
                   (b) wegen einer gegenwärtigen oder früheren persönlichen oder geschäftlichen
                       Beziehung des Gläubigers zu der Bundesrepublik Deutschland zu zahlen sind, und
                       nicht allein deshalb, weil Zahlungen auf die Schuldverschreibungen aus Quellen in
                       der Bundesrepublik Deutschland stammen oder für Zwecke der Besteuerung so
                       behandelt werden, oder dort besichert sind; oder
                   (c) aufgrund (i) einer Richtlinie oder Verordnung der Europäischen Union betreffend
                       die Besteuerung von Zinserträgen oder (ii) einer zwischenstaatlichen Vereinbarung
                       über deren Besteuerung, an der die Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder die
                       Europäische Union beteiligt ist, oder (iii) einer gesetzlichen Vorschrift, die diese
                       Richtlinie, Verordnung oder Vereinbarung umsetzt oder befolgt, abzuziehen oder
                       einzubehalten sind; oder
                   (d) aufgrund einer Rechtsänderung zu zahlen sind, welche später als 30 Tage nach
                       Fälligkeit der betreffenden Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen oder, wenn dies später
                       erfolgt, ordnungsgemäßer Bereitstellung aller fälligen Beträge und einer
                       diesbezüglichen Bekanntmachung gemäß § 13 wirksam wird; oder
                   (e) aufgrund der Ansässigkeit des Gläubigers in einem nicht-kooperativen Staat oder
                                                 146


                      Gebiet im Sinne des Gesetzes zur Abwehr von Steuervermeidung und unfairem
                      Steuerwettbewerb (Steueroasen-Abwehrgesetz) vom 25. Juni 2021 in seiner
                      jeweils gültigen Fassung (einschließlich etwaiger auf der Grundlage dieses
                      Gesetzes erlassener Verordnungen) zu zahlen sind.
                   Die seit dem 1. Januar 2009 in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland geltende
                   Abgeltungssteuer und der darauf erhobene Solidaritätszuschlag sind keine Steuer
                   oder sonstige Abgabe im oben genannten Sinn, für die zusätzliche Beträge seitens
                   der Emittentin zu zahlen wären.]

Im Fall von        [Sämtliche auf die Schuldverschreibungen oder unter der Garantie zu zahlenden
Schuldverschrei-   Beträge sind ohne Einbehalt oder Abzug von oder aufgrund von gegenwärtigen oder
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   zukünftigen Steuern oder sonstigen Abgaben gleich welcher Art zu leisten, die von
begeben werden,    oder in den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder für deren
ist Folgendes      Rechnung oder von oder für Rechnung einer politischen Untergliederung oder
anwendbar          Steuerbehörde der oder in den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
                   auferlegt oder erhoben werden, es sei denn, ein solcher Einbehalt oder Abzug ist
                   gesetzlich vorgeschrieben. Ist ein solcher Einbehalt gesetzlich vorgeschrieben, so wird
                   die Emittentin diejenigen zusätzlichen Beträge (die "zusätzlichen Beträge") zahlen,
                   die erforderlich sind, damit die den Gläubigern zufließenden Nettobeträge nach
                   diesem Einbehalt oder Abzug jeweils den Beträgen entsprechen, die ohne einen
                   solchen Einbehalt oder Abzug von den Gläubigern empfangen worden wären; die
                   Verpflichtung zur Zahlung solcher zusätzlicher Beträge besteht jedoch nicht im
                   Hinblick auf Steuern und Abgaben, die:
                   (a) von einer als Depotbank oder Inkassobeauftragter des Gläubigers handelnden
                       Person oder sonst auf andere Weise zu entrichten sind als dadurch, dass die
                       Emittentin aus den von ihr zu leistenden Zahlungen von Kapital oder Zinsen einen
                       Abzug oder Einbehalt vornimmt; oder
                   (b) wegen einer gegenwärtigen oder früheren persönlichen oder geschäftlichen
                       Beziehung des Gläubigers zu den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik
                       Deutschland zu zahlen sind, und nicht allein deshalb, weil Zahlungen auf die
                       Schuldverschreibungen aus Quellen in den Niederlanden oder der Bundesrepublik
                       Deutschland stammen oder für Zwecke der Besteuerung so behandelt werden,
                       aufgrund der Anwendung des niederländischen Quellensteuergesetzes 2021 (Wet
                       bronbelasting 2021) abgezogen oder einbehalten werden oder dort besichert sind;
                       oder
                   (c) aufgrund (i) einer Richtlinie oder Verordnung der Europäischen Union betreffend
                       die Besteuerung von Zinserträgen oder (ii) einer zwischenstaatlichen Vereinbarung
                       über deren Besteuerung, an der die Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder die
                       Niederlande oder die Europäische Union beteiligt ist, oder (iii) einer gesetzlichen
                       Vorschrift, die diese Richtlinie, Verordnung oder Vereinbarung umsetzt oder
                       befolgt, abzuziehen oder einzubehalten sind; oder
                   (d) aufgrund einer Rechtsänderung zu zahlen sind, welche später als 30 Tage nach
                       Fälligkeit der betreffenden Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen oder, wenn dies später
                       erfolgt, ordnungsgemäßer Bereitstellung aller fälligen Beträge und einer
                       diesbezüglichen Bekanntmachung gemäß § 13 wirksam wird.




                   Die seit dem 1. Januar 2009 in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland geltende
                   Abgeltungssteuer und der darauf erhobene Solidaritätszuschlag sind keine Steuer
                   oder sonstige Abgabe im oben genannten Sinn, für die zusätzliche Beträge seitens
                   der Emittentin zu zahlen wären.]

                                                         §8
                                                   VORLEGUNGSFRIST
                   Die in § 801 Absatz 1 Satz 1 BGB bestimmte Vorlegungsfrist wird für die
                   Schuldverschreibungen auf zehn Jahre verkürzt.
                                                 147




                                                           §9
                                                        KÜNDIGUNG
Im Fall von        [(1) Kündigungsgründe. Jeder Gläubiger ist berechtigt, seine Schuldverschreibung zu
Schuldverschrei-   kündigen und deren sofortige Rückzahlung zu ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag zuzüglich
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   (etwaiger) bis zum Tage der Rückzahlung aufgelaufener Zinsen zu verlangen, falls:
werden, ist        (a) die Emittentin Kapital oder Zinsen nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach dem
Folgendes
anwendbar              betreffenden Fälligkeitstag zahlt; oder
                   (b) die Emittentin die ordnungsgemäße Erfüllung einer anderen Verpflichtung aus den
                       Schuldverschreibungen unterlässt und diese Unterlassung länger als 30 Tage
                       fortdauert, nachdem der Fiscal Agent hierüber eine Benachrichtigung von einem
                       Gläubiger erhalten hat; oder
                   (c) eine Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit (wie in § 2 Absatz (2) definiert) oder ein
                       Schuldscheindarlehen (mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr)
                       der Emittentin vorzeitig zahlbar wird aufgrund einer Nicht- oder Schlechtleistung
                       des dieser Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit oder des Schuldscheindarlehens (mit einer
                       ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr) zugrunde liegenden Vertrages,
                       oder die Emittentin einer Zahlungsverpflichtung in Höhe oder im Gegenwert von
                       mehr als EUR 200.000.000 aus einer Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit oder einem
                       Schuldscheindarlehen (mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr)
                       oder    aufgrund     einer    Bürgschaft    oder    Garantie,    die     für    die
                       Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit   oder    ein   Schuldscheindarlehen      (mit   einer
                       ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr) Dritter gegeben wurde, nicht
                       innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach ihrer Fälligkeit bzw. im Falle einer Bürgschaft oder
                       Garantie nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach Inanspruchnahme aus dieser
                       Bürgschaft oder Garantie nachkommt, es sei denn, die Emittentin bestreitet in
                       gutem Glauben, dass diese Zahlungsverpflichtung besteht oder fällig ist bzw. diese
                       Bürgschaft oder Garantie berechtigterweise geltend gemacht wird, oder falls eine
                       für solche Verbindlichkeiten bestellte Sicherheit für die oder von den daraus
                       berechtigten Gläubiger(n) in Anspruch genommen wird; oder
                   (d) die Emittentin ihre Zahlungsunfähigkeit allgemein bekanntgibt oder ihre Zahlungen
                       einstellt; oder
                   (e) ein Gericht ein Insolvenzverfahren gegen die Emittentin eröffnet, ein solches
                       Verfahren eingeleitet und nicht innerhalb von 60 Tagen aufgehoben oder
                       ausgesetzt worden ist, oder die Emittentin ein solches Verfahren einleitet oder
                       beantragt; oder
                   (f) die Emittentin ihre Geschäftstätigkeit ganz oder überwiegend einstellt, alle oder den
                       wesentlichen Teil ihres Vermögens veräußert oder anderweitig abgibt und (i)
                       dadurch den Wert ihres Vermögens wesentlich vermindert und (ii) es dadurch
                       wahrscheinlich wird, dass die Emittentin ihre Zahlungsverpflichtungen gegenüber
                       den Gläubigern nicht mehr erfüllen kann; oder
                   (g) die Emittentin in Liquidation tritt, es sei denn, dies geschieht im Zusammenhang
                       mit einer Verschmelzung oder einer anderen Form des Zusammenschlusses mit
                       einer anderen Gesellschaft oder im Zusammenhang mit einer Umwandlung und
                       diese Gesellschaft übernimmt alle Verpflichtungen, die die Emittentin im
                       Zusammenhang mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen eingegangen ist.
                   Das Kündigungsrecht erlischt, falls der Kündigungsgrund vor Ausübung des Rechts
                   geheilt wurde.
                   (2) Quorum. In den Fällen des Absatz (1)(b) und/oder (1)(c) wird eine Kündigung,
                   sofern nicht bei deren Eingang zugleich einer der in Absatz (1)(a) und (1)(d) bis (g)
                   bezeichneten Kündigungsgründe vorliegt, erst wirksam, wenn bei dem Fiscal Agent
                   Kündigungserklärungen      von    Gläubigern     von   Schuldverschreibungen       im
                                                                 1
                   Gesamtnennbetrag       von     mindestens       /10  der     dann     ausstehenden
                   Schuldverschreibungen eingegangen sind.
                   (3) Benachrichtigung. Eine Benachrichtigung, einschließlich einer Kündigung der
                   Schuldverschreibungen gemäß Absatz (1) ist schriftlich in deutscher oder englischer
                   Sprache gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent zu erklären und persönlich oder per
                                                 148


                   Einschreiben an dessen bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle zu übermitteln.]

Im Fall von        [(1) Kündigungsgründe. Jeder Gläubiger ist berechtigt, seine Schuldverschreibung zu
Schuldverschrei-   kündigen und deren sofortige Rückzahlung zu ihrem Rückzahlungsbetrag zuzüglich
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   (etwaiger) bis zum Tage der Rückzahlung aufgelaufener Zinsen zu verlangen, falls:
begeben werden,    (a) die Emittentin Kapital oder Zinsen nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach dem
ist Folgendes
anwendbar              betreffenden Fälligkeitstag zahlt; oder
                   (b) die Emittentin die ordnungsgemäße Erfüllung einer anderen Verpflichtung aus den
                       Schuldverschreibungen oder die Garantin die Erfüllung einer Verpflichtung aus der
                       Garantie unterlässt und diese Unterlassung länger als 30 Tage fortdauert,
                       nachdem der Fiscal Agent hierüber eine Benachrichtigung von einem Gläubiger
                       erhalten hat; oder
                   (c) eine Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit (wie in § 2 Absatz (2) definiert) oder ein
                       Schuldscheindarlehen (mit einer ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr)
                       der Emittentin oder der Garantin vorzeitig zahlbar wird aufgrund einer Nicht- oder
                       Schlechtleistung     des     dieser    Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit    oder     des
                       Schuldscheindarlehens zugrunde liegenden Vertrages, oder die Emittentin oder
                       die Garantin einer Zahlungsverpflichtung in Höhe oder im Gegenwert von mehr als
                       EUR 200.000.000       aus    einer    Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit   oder    einem
                       Schuldscheindarlehen oder aufgrund einer Bürgschaft oder Garantie, die für die
                       Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit oder ein Schuldscheindarlehen Dritter gegeben wurde,
                       nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach ihrer Fälligkeit bzw. im Falle einer Bürgschaft
                       oder Garantie nicht innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach Inanspruchnahme aus dieser
                       Bürgschaft oder Garantie nachkommt, es sei denn, die Emittentin oder die
                       Garantin bestreitet in gutem Glauben, dass diese Zahlungsverpflichtung besteht
                       oder fällig ist bzw. diese Bürgschaft oder Garantie berechtigterweise geltend
                       gemacht wird, oder falls eine für solche Verbindlichkeiten bestellte Sicherheit für
                       die oder von den daraus berechtigten Gläubiger(n) in Anspruch genommen wird;
                       oder
                   (d) die Emittentin oder die Garantin ihre Zahlungsunfähigkeit allgemein bekanntgibt
                       oder ihre Zahlungen einstellt; oder
                   (e) ein Gericht ein Insolvenzverfahren gegen die Emittentin oder die Garantin eröffnet,
                       ein solches Verfahren eingeleitet und nicht innerhalb von 60 Tagen aufgehoben
                       oder ausgesetzt worden ist, oder die Emittentin oder die Garantin ein solches
                       Verfahren einleitet oder beantragt oder die Emittentin ein "surseance van betaling"
                       (im Sinne des niederländischen Insolvenzrechts) beantragt; oder
                   (f) die Emittentin oder die Garantin ihre Geschäftstätigkeit ganz oder überwiegend
                       einstellt, alle oder den wesentlichen Teil ihres Vermögens veräußert oder
                       anderweitig abgibt und (i) dadurch den Wert ihres Vermögens wesentlich vermindert
                       und (ii) es dadurch wahrscheinlich wird, dass die Emittentin oder die Garantin ihre
                       Zahlungsverpflichtungen gegenüber den Gläubigern nicht mehr erfüllen kann; oder
                   (g) die Emittentin oder die Garantin in Liquidation tritt, es sei denn, dies geschieht im
                       Zusammenhang mit einer Verschmelzung oder einer anderen Form des
                       Zusammenschlusses mit einer anderen Gesellschaft oder im Zusammenhang mit
                       einer Umwandlung und diese Gesellschaft übernimmt alle Verpflichtungen, die die
                       Emittentin oder die Garantin im Zusammenhang mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen
                       eingegangen ist; oder
                   (h) die Garantie aus irgendeinem Grund nicht mehr wirksam und rechtlich bindend ist.
                   Das Kündigungsrecht erlischt, falls der Kündigungsgrund vor Ausübung des Rechts
                   geheilt wurde.
                   (2) Quorum. In den Fällen des Absatz (1)(b) und/oder (1)(c) wird eine Kündigung,
                   sofern nicht bei deren Eingang zugleich einer der in Absatz (1)(a) und (1)(d) bis (h)
                   bezeichneten Kündigungsgründe vorliegt, erst wirksam, wenn bei dem Fiscal Agent
                   Kündigungserklärungen      von    Gläubigern     von   Schuldverschreibungen       im
                                                                 1
                   Gesamtnennbetrag       von     mindestens       /10  der     dann     ausstehenden
                   Schuldverschreibungen eingegangen sind.
                   (3) Benachrichtigung. Eine Benachrichtigung, einschließlich einer Kündigung der
                                                 149


                   Schuldverschreibungen gemäß Absatz (1) ist schriftlich in deutscher oder englischer
                   Sprache gegenüber dem Fiscal Agent zu erklären und persönlich oder per
                   Einschreiben an dessen bezeichnete Geschäftsstelle zu übermitteln.]

                                                          § 10
                                                       ERSETZUNG
Im Fall von        [(1) Ersetzung. Die Emittentin ist jederzeit berechtigt, sofern sie sich nicht mit einer
Schuldverschrei-   Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen auf die Schuldverschreibungen in Verzug befindet,
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                   ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger ein mit ihr verbundenes Unternehmen (wie unten
werden, ist        definiert) an ihrer Stelle als Hauptschuldnerin (die "Nachfolgeschuldnerin") für alle
Folgendes          Verpflichtungen aus und im Zusammenhang mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen
anwendbar          einzusetzen, vorausgesetzt, dass:]

Im Fall von        [(1) Ersetzung. Die Emittentin ist jederzeit berechtigt, sofern sie sich nicht mit einer
Schuldverschrei-   Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen auf die Schuldverschreibungen in Verzug befindet,
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                   ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger entweder die Garantin oder ein mit der Garantin
begeben werden,    verbundenes Unternehmen (wie unten definiert) an ihrer Stelle als Hauptschuldnerin
ist Folgendes      (die "Nachfolgeschuldnerin") für alle Verpflichtungen aus und im Zusammenhang
anwendbar          mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen einzusetzen, vorausgesetzt, dass:]
                   (a) die Nachfolgeschuldnerin alle Verpflichtungen der Emittentin in Bezug auf die
                       Schuldverschreibungen übernimmt;
                   (b) die Nachfolgeschuldnerin alle erforderlichen Genehmigungen erhalten hat und
                       berechtigt ist, an den Fiscal Agent die zur Erfüllung der Zahlungsverpflichtungen
                       aus den Schuldverschreibungen zahlbaren Beträge in der festgelegten Währung
                       zu zahlen, ohne verpflichtet zu sein, jeweils in dem Land, in dem die
                       Nachfolgeschuldnerin oder die Emittentin ihren Sitz oder Steuersitz haben,
                       erhobene Steuern oder andere Abgaben jeder Art abzuziehen oder einzubehalten;
                   (c) die Nachfolgeschuldnerin sich verpflichtet hat, jeden Gläubiger hinsichtlich solcher
                       Steuern, Abgaben oder behördlichen Lasten freizustellen, die einem Gläubiger
                       bezüglich der Ersetzung auferlegt werden;
Im Fall von        [(d) sichergestellt ist, dass sich die Verpflichtungen der Emittentin aus der Garantie
Schuldverschrei-       und der Negativverpflichtung des Debt Issuance Programms der Emittentin (auf
bungen, die von
BASF begeben
                       die die unten in § 11 aufgeführten auf die Schuldverschreibungen anwendbaren
werden, ist            Bestimmungen       sinngemäß       Anwendung       finden)    auch      auf    die
Folgendes              Schuldverschreibungen der Nachfolgeschuldnerin erstrecken; und]
anwendbar


Im Fall von        [(d) sichergestellt ist, dass sich die Verpflichtungen der Garantin aus der Garantie
Schuldverschrei-       und der Negativverpflichtung des Debt Issuance Programms der Emittentin auch
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                       auf die Schuldverschreibungen der Nachfolgeschuldnerin erstrecken; und]
begeben werden,
ist Folgendes
anwendbar

                   (e) dem Fiscal Agent jeweils eine Bestätigung bezüglich der betroffenen
                       Rechtsordnungen von anerkannten Rechtsanwälten vorgelegt wird, dass die
                       Bestimmungen in den vorstehenden Unterabsätzen (a), (b), (c) und (d) erfüllt
                       wurden.
                   Für die Zwecke dieses § 10 bedeutet "verbundenes Unternehmen" ein verbundenes
                   Unternehmen im Sinne von § 15 Aktiengesetz.
                   (2) Bekanntmachung. Jede Ersetzung ist gemäß § 13 bekannt zu machen.
                   (3) Ermächtigung der Emittentin. Im Fall einer solchen Ersetzung ist die Emittentin
                   ermächtigt, die die Schuldverschreibungen verbriefende Globalurkunde und diese
                   Anleihebedingungen ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger in dem notwendigen Umfang zu
                   ändern, um die sich aus der Ersetzung ergebenden Änderungen widerzuspiegeln.
                   Eine   entsprechend    angepaßte,    die     Schuldverschreibungen     verbriefende
                   Globalurkunde und Anleihebedingungen werden beim Clearing System hinterlegt.
                                                   150




                                                  § 11
                        ÄNDERUNG DER ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN, GEMEINSAMER VERTRETER[,
                                        ÄNDERUNG DER GARANTIE]
                     (1) Änderung der Anleihebedingungen. Die Gläubiger können entsprechend den
                     Bestimmungen des Gesetzes über Schuldverschreibungen aus Gesamtemissionen, in
                     der geänderten Fassung (Schuldverschreibungsgesetz – "SchVG") durch einen
                     Beschluss mit der in Absatz 2 bestimmten Mehrheit über einen im SchVG
                     zugelassenen Gegenstand eine Änderung der Anleihebedingungen mit der Emittentin
                     vereinbaren. Die Mehrheitsbeschlüsse der Gläubiger sind für alle Gläubiger
                     gleichermaßen verbindlich. Ein Mehrheitsbeschluß der Gläubiger, der nicht gleiche
                     Bedingungen für alle Gläubiger vorsieht, ist unwirksam, es sei denn die
                     benachteiligten Gläubiger stimmen ihrer Benachteiligung ausdrücklich zu.
                     (2) Mehrheitserfordernisse. Die Gläubiger entscheiden mit einer Mehrheit von
                     mindestens 75 % der an der Abstimmung teilnehmenden Stimmrechte. Beschlüsse,
                     durch welche der wesentliche Inhalt der Anleihebedingungen nicht geändert wird und
                     die keinen Gegenstand der § 5 Absatz 3, Nr. 1 bis Nr. 8 des SchVG betreffen,
                     bedürfen zu ihrer Wirksamkeit einer einfachen Mehrheit der an der Abstimmung
                     teilnehmenden Stimmrechte.
                     (3) Beschlüsse der Gläubiger. Beschlüsse der Gläubiger werden nach Wahl der
                     Emittentin im Wege der Abstimmung ohne Versammlung nach § 18 und §§ 5 ff.
                     SchVG oder einer Gläubigerversammlung nach §§ 5 ff. SchVG gefasst.
                     (4) Leitung der Abstimmung ohne Versammlung. Die Abstimmung wird von einem von
                     der Emittentin beauftragten Notar oder, falls der gemeinsame Vertreter zur
                     Abstimmung aufgefordert hat, von dem gemeinsamen Vertreter der Gläubiger geleitet.
                     (5) Stimmrecht. An Abstimmungen der Gläubiger nimmt jeder Gläubiger nach
                     Maßgabe des Nennwerts oder des rechnerischen Anteils seiner Berechtigung an den
                     ausstehenden Schuldverschreibungen teil.
                     (6) Gemeinsamer Vertreter.
Falls kein           [Die Gläubiger können durch Mehrheitsbeschluß zur Wahrnehmung ihrer Rechte
gemeinsamer          einen gemeinsamen Vertreter für alle Gläubiger bestellen.]
Vertreter in den
Bedingungen
bestellt wird, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Im Fall der          [Gemeinsamer Vertreter ist [Gemeinsamer Vertreter]. Die Haftung des
Bestellung des       gemeinsamen Vertreters ist auf das Zehnfache seiner jährlichen Vergütung
gemeinsamen
Vertreters in den
                     beschränkt, es sei denn, dem gemeinsamen Vertreter fällt Vorsatz oder grobe
Bedingungen, ist     Fahrlässigkeit zur Last.]
Folgendes
anwendbar

                     Der gemeinsame Vertreter hat die Aufgaben und Befugnisse, welche ihm durch
                     Gesetz oder von den Gläubigern durch Mehrheitsbeschluß eingeräumt wurden. Er hat
                     die Weisungen der Gläubiger zu befolgen. Soweit er zur Geltendmachung von
                     Rechten der Gläubiger ermächtigt ist, sind die einzelnen Gläubiger zur selbständigen
                     Geltendmachung dieser Rechte nicht befugt, es sei denn der Mehrheitsbeschluß sieht
                     dies ausdrücklich vor. Über seine Tätigkeit hat der gemeinsame Vertreter den
                     Gläubigern zu berichten. Für die Abberufung und die sonstigen Rechte und Pflichten
                     des gemeinsamen Vertreters gelten die Vorschriften des SchVG.
                     (7) Verfahrensrechtliche     Bestimmungen     über   Gläubigerbeschlüsse   in   einer
                     Gläubigerversammlung.
                     (a) Frist, Anmeldung, Nachweis.
                     (i) Die Gläubigerversammlung        ist mindestens   14 Tage   vor dem Tag       der
                     Versammlung einzuberufen.
                     (ii) Sieht die Einberufung vor, dass die Teilnahme an der Gläubigerversammlung oder
                             151


die Ausübung der Stimmrechte davon abhängig ist, dass sich die Gläubiger vor der
Versammlung anmelden, so tritt für die Berechnung der Einberufungsfrist an die Stelle
des Tages der Versammlung der Tag, bis zu dessen Ablauf sich die Gläubiger vor der
Versammlung anmelden müssen. Die Anmeldung muss unter der in der
Bekanntmachung der Einberufung mitgeteilten Adresse spätestens am dritten Tag vor
der Gläubigerversammlung zugehen.
(iii) Die Einberufung kann vorsehen, wie die Berechtigung zur Teilnahme an der
Gläubigerversammlung nachzuweisen ist. Sofern die Einberufung nichts anderes
bestimmt, berechtigt ein von einem durch die Emittentin zu ernennenden Beauftragten
ausgestellter Stimmzettel seinen Inhaber zur Teilnahme an und zur Stimmabgabe in
der Gläubigerversammlung. Der Stimmzettel kann vom Gläubiger bezogen werden,
indem er mindestens sechs Tage vor der für die Gläubigerversammlung bestimmten
Zeit (a) seine Schuldverschreibungen bei einem durch die Emittentin zu ernennenden
Beauftragten oder gemäß einer Weisung dieses Beauftragten hinterlegt hat oder (b)
seine Schuldverschreibungen bei einer Depotbank in Übereinstimmung mit deren
Verfahrensregeln gesperrt sowie einen Nachweis über die Inhaberschaft und
Sperrung der Schuldverschreibungen an den Beauftragten der Emittentin geliefert hat.
Die Einberufung kann auch die Erbringung eines Identitätsnachweises der ein
Stimmrecht ausübenden Person vorsehen.
(b) Inhalt der Einberufung, Bekanntmachung.
(i) In der Einberufung (die "Einberufung") müssen die Firma, der Sitz der Emittentin,
die Zeit und der Ort der Gläubigerversammlung sowie die Bedingungen angegeben
werden, von denen die Teilnahme an der Gläubigerversammlung und die Ausübung
des Stimmrechts abhängen, einschließlich der in Absatz (a)(ii) und (iii) genannten
Voraussetzungen.
(ii) Die Einberufung ist unverzüglich im Bundesanzeiger sowie zusätzlich gemäß § 13
öffentlich bekannt zu machen. Die Kosten der Bekanntmachung hat die Emittentin zu
tragen.
(iii) Von dem Tag an, an dem die Gläubigerversammlung einberufen wurde, bis zum
Tag der Gläubigerversammlung wird die Emittentin auf ihrer Internetseite den
Gläubigern die Einberufung und die exakten Bedingungen für die Teilnahme an der
Gläubigerversammlung und die Ausübung von Stimmrechten zur Verfügung stellen.
(c) Auskunftspflicht, Abstimmung.
(i) Die Emittentin hat jedem Gläubiger auf Verlangen in der Gläubigerversammlung
Auskunft zu erteilen, soweit sie zur sachgemäßen Beurteilung eines Gegenstands der
Tagesordnung oder eines Vorschlags zur Beschlussfassung erforderlich ist.
(ii) Auf die Abgabe und die Auszählung der Stimmen sind die Vorschriften des
Aktiengesetzes über die Abstimmung der Aktionäre in der Hauptversammlung
entsprechend anzuwenden, soweit nicht in der Einberufung etwas anderes
vorgesehen ist.
(d) Bekanntmachung von Beschlüssen.
(i) Die Emittentin hat die Beschlüsse der Gläubiger auf ihre Kosten in geeigneter
Form öffentlich bekannt zu machen. Hat die Emittentin ihren Sitz in der
Bundesrepublik Deutschland, so sind die Beschlüsse unverzüglich im Bundesanzeiger
sowie zusätzlich gemäß § 13 zu veröffentlichen; die nach § 50 Absatz 1 des
Wertpapierhandelsgesetzes vorgeschriebene Veröffentlichung ist jedoch ausreichend.
(ii) Außerdem hat die Emittentin die Beschlüsse der Gläubiger sowie, wenn ein
Gläubigerbeschluss die Anleihebedingungen ändert, den Wortlaut der ursprünglichen
Anleihebedingungen vom Tag nach der Gläubigerversammlung an für die Dauer von
mindestens einem Monat im Internet unter ihrer Adresse der Öffentlichkeit zugänglich
zu machen.
(e) Abstimmung ohne Versammlung.
In der Aufforderung zur Stimmabgabe ist der Zeitraum anzugeben, innerhalb dessen
die Stimmen abgegeben werden können. Er beträgt mindestens 72 Stunden.
Während des Abstimmungszeitraums können die Gläubiger ihre Stimme gegenüber
dem Abstimmungsleiter in Textform abgeben. In der Aufforderung können auch
                                                      152


                         andere Formen der Stimmabgabe vorgesehen werden. In der Aufforderung muss im
                         Einzelnen angegeben werden, welche Voraussetzungen erfüllt sein müssen, damit die
                         Stimmen gezählt werden.
Im Fall von              [(8) Änderung der Garantie. Die oben aufgeführten auf die Schuldverschreibungen
Schuldverschrei-         anwendbaren Bestimmungen finden sinngemäß auf die Bestimmungen der Garantie
bungen, die von
BASF Finance
                         der BASF Anwendung.]
begeben werden,
ist Folgendes
anwendbar


                                                         § 12
                                      BEGEBUNG WEITERER SCHULDVERSCHREIBUNGEN,
                                               ANKAUF UND ENTWERTUNG
                         (1) Begebung weiterer Schuldverschreibungen. Die Emittentin ist berechtigt, jederzeit
                         ohne Zustimmung der Gläubiger weitere Schuldverschreibungen mit gleicher
                         Ausstattung (gegebenenfalls mit Ausnahme des Tags der Begebung, des
                         Verzinsungsbeginns und/oder des Ausgabepreises) in der Weise zu begeben, dass
                         sie mit diesen Schuldverschreibungen eine einheitliche Serie bilden.
                         (2) Ankauf. Die Emittentin ist berechtigt, jederzeit Schuldverschreibungen im Markt
                         oder anderweitig zu jedem beliebigen Preis zu kaufen. Die von der Emittentin
                         erworbenen Schuldverschreibungen können nach Wahl der Emittentin von ihr
                         gehalten, weiterverkauft oder bei dem Fiscal Agent zwecks Entwertung eingereicht
                         werden. Sofern diese Käufe durch öffentliches Angebot erfolgen, muss dieses
                         Angebot allen Gläubigern gemacht werden.
                         (3) Entwertung. Sämtliche vollständig zurückgezahlten Schuldverschreibungen sind
                         unverzüglich zu entwerten und können nicht wiederbegeben oder wiederverkauft
                         werden.

                                                                 § 13
                                                            MITTEILUNGEN
Im Fall von              [(1) Bekanntmachung. Alle die Schuldverschreibungen betreffenden Mitteilungen
Schuldverschrei-         erfolgen durch elektronische Publikation auf der Website der Luxemburger Börse
bungen, die in der
offiziellen Liste der
                         (www.bourse.lu). Jede Mitteilung gilt am dritten Tag nach dem Tag der
Luxemburger              Veröffentlichung als wirksam erfolgt.
Börse notiert
werden, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar
              i.i.i.3.   (2) Mitteilungen an das Clearing System. Solange Schuldverschreibungen an der
                         Luxemburger Börse notiert sind, findet Absatz (1) Anwendung. Soweit die Mitteilung
                         den Zinssatz betrifft oder die Regeln der Luxemburger Börse dies sonst zulassen,
                         kann die Emittentin eine Veröffentlichung nach Absatz (1) durch eine Mitteilung an das
                         Clearing System zur Weiterleitung an die Gläubiger ersetzen; jede derartige Mitteilung
                         gilt am siebten Tag nach dem Tag der Mitteilung an das Clearing System als den
                         Gläubigern mitgeteilt.]
              i.i.i.4.
Im Fall von i.i.i.5.     [(1) Mitteilungen an das Clearing System. Die Emittentin wird alle die
Schuldverschrei-         Schuldverschreibungen betreffenden Mitteilungen an das Clearing System zur
bungen, die nicht
an einer Börse
                         Weiterleitung an die Gläubiger übermitteln. Jede derartige Mitteilung gilt am siebten
notiert sind, ist        Tag nach dem Tag der Mitteilung an das Clearing System als den Gläubigern
Folgendes                mitgeteilt.]
anwendbar

                         [(3)] Form der Mitteilung. Mitteilungen, die von einem Gläubiger gemacht werden,
                         müssen in Textform (z.B. eMail oder Fax) oder schriftlich erfolgen und zusammen mit
                         dem Nachweis seiner Inhaberschaft gemäß § 14 Absatz [4] an den Fiscal Agent
                         geschickt werden. Eine solche Mitteilung kann über das Clearing System in der von
                         dem Fiscal Agent und dem Clearing System dafür vorgesehenen Weise erfolgen.
                                                   153




                                                     § 14
                              ANWENDBARES RECHT, GERICHTSSTAND UND GERICHTLICHE
                                             GELTENDMACHUNG
                      (1) Anwendbares Recht. Form und Inhalt der Schuldverschreibungen sowie die
                      Rechte und Pflichten der Gläubiger und der Emittentin bestimmen sich in jeder
                      Hinsicht nach deutschem Recht.
                      (2) Gerichtsstand. Nicht ausschließlich zuständig für sämtliche im Zusammenhang mit
                      den Schuldverschreibungen entstehenden Klagen oder sonstige Verfahren
                      ("Rechtsstreitigkeiten") ist das Landgericht Frankfurt am Main, Bundesrepublik
                      Deutschland.
Im Falle von          [(3) Bestellung von Zustellungsbevollmächtigten. Für etwaige Rechtsstreitigkeiten vor
Schuldver-            deutschen Gerichten bestellt die Emittentin die BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056
schreibungen, die
von BASF Finance
                      Ludwigshafen      am      Rhein,    Bundesrepublik      Deutschland,     zu     ihrer
begeben werden,       Zustellungsbevollmächtigten in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland.]
ist Folgendes
anwendbar

                      [(4)] Gerichtliche Geltendmachung. Jeder Gläubiger von Schuldverschreibungen ist
                      berechtigt, in jedem Rechtsstreit gegen die Emittentin oder in jedem Rechtsstreit, in
                      dem der Gläubiger und die Emittentin Partei sind, seine Rechte aus diesen
                      Schuldverschreibungen im eigenen Namen auf der folgenden Grundlage zu schützen
                      oder geltend zu machen: (i) er bringt eine Bescheinigung der Depotbank bei, bei der
                      er für die Schuldverschreibungen ein Wertpapierdepot unterhält, welche (a) den
                      vollständigen Namen und die vollständige Adresse des Gläubigers enthält, (b) den
                      Gesamtnennbetrag der Schuldverschreibungen bezeichnet, die unter dem Datum der
                      Bestätigung auf dem Wertpapierdepot verbucht sind und (c) bestätigt, dass die
                      Depotbank gegenüber dem Clearing System eine schriftliche Erklärung abgegeben
                      hat, die die vorstehend unter (a) und (b) bezeichneten Informationen enthält; und (ii)
                      er legt eine Kopie der die betreffenden Schuldverschreibungen verbriefenden
                      Globalurkunde      vor,  deren     Übereinstimmung     mit    dem    Original   eine
                      vertretungsberechtigte Person des Clearing Systems oder des Verwahrers des
                      Clearing Systems bestätigt hat, ohne dass eine Vorlage der Originalbelege oder der
                      die Schuldverschreibungen verbriefenden Globalurkunde in einem solchen Verfahren
                      erforderlich wäre. Für die Zwecke des Vorstehenden bezeichnet "Depotbank" jede
                      Bank oder ein sonstiges anerkanntes Finanzinstitut, das berechtigt ist, das
                      Wertpapierverwahrungsgeschäft zu betreiben und bei der/dem der Gläubiger ein
                      Wertpapierdepot für die Schuldverschreibungen unterhält, einschließlich des Clearing
                      Systems. Unbeschadet des Vorstehenden kann jeder Gläubiger seine Rechte aus den
                      Schuldverschreibungen auch auf jede andere Weise schützen oder geltend machen,
                      die im Land des Rechtsstreits prozessual zulässig ist.

                                                             § 15
                                                           SPRACHE
Falls die Anleihe-    [Diese Anleihebedingungen sind in deutscher Sprache abgefasst. Eine Übersetzung
bedingungen in        in die englische Sprache ist beigefügt. Der deutsche Text ist bindend und maßgeblich.
deutscher Sprache
mit einer
                      Die Übersetzung in die englische Sprache ist unverbindlich.]
Übersetzung in die
englische Sprache
abgefasst sind, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar


Falls die Anleihe-    [Diese Anleihebedingungen sind in englischer Sprache abgefasst. Eine Übersetzung
bedingungen in        in die deutsche Sprache ist beigefügt. Der englische Text ist bindend und maßgeblich.
englischer Sprache
mit einer
                      Die Übersetzung in die deutsche Sprache ist unverbindlich.]
Übersetzung in die
deutsche Sprache
abgefasst sind, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar
                                                  154



Falls die Anleihe-    [Diese Anleihebedingungen sind ausschließlich in deutscher Sprache abgefasst.]
bedingungen
ausschließlich in
deutscher Sprache
abgefasst sind, ist
Folgendes
anwendbar
                                                   155


                                              GARANTIE
                                                   der

 BASF SE, Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Bundesrepublik Deutschland, zu Gunsten der Gläubiger von
             Schuldverschreibungen (die "Schuldverschreibungen"), die von der
    BASF Finance Europe N.V., Arnhem, Niederlande, im Rahmen des EUR 20.000.000.000
                 Debt Issuance Program (das "Programm") begeben werden
PRÄAMBEL
(A) Die BASF SE ("BASF") und die BASF Finance Europe N.V. ("BASF Finance") beabsichtigen, von
    Zeit zu Zeit Schuldverschreibungen im Rahmen des Programms zu begeben, deren jeweils
    ausstehender Gesamtnennbetrag das Programm-Limit nicht übersteigt.
(B) Die Schuldverschreibungen unterliegen den Anleihebedingungen der Schuldverschreibungen nach
    deutschem Recht (in der durch die anwendbaren Endgültigen Bedingungen jeweils geänderten,
    ergänzten oder modifizierten Fassung, die "Bedingungen").
(C) Die BASF SE (die "Garantin") beabsichtigt, mit dieser Garantie die Zahlung von Kapital und Zinsen
    sowie von jeglichen sonstigen Beträgen zu garantieren, die aufgrund der von der BASF Finance zu
    irgendeiner Zeit im Rahmen des Programms begebenen Schuldverschreibungen zu leisten sind.
HIERMIT WIRD FOLGENDES VEREINBART:
1.   Die Garantin übernimmt gegenüber den Gläubigern jeder einzelnen Schuldverschreibung (wobei
     dieser Begriff jede (vorläufige oder Dauer-) Globalurkunde, die Schuldverschreibungen verbrieft,
     einschließt), die jetzt oder später von der BASF Finance im Rahmen des Programms begeben wird,
     die unbedingte und unwiderrufliche Garantie für die ordnungsgemäße Zahlung von Kapital und Zinsen
     auf die Schuldverschreibungen sowie von jeglichen sonstigen Beträgen, die in Übereinstimmung mit
     den Bedingungen auf irgendeine Schuldverschreibung zahlbar sind, und zwar zu den in den
     Bedingungen bestimmten Fälligkeiten.
2.   Diese Garantie begründet eine unwiderrufliche, nicht nachrangige und (vorbehaltlich der
     Bestimmungen in Ziffer 4 dieser Garantie) nicht besicherte Verpflichtung der Garantin, die mit allen
     sonstigen nicht nachrangigen und nicht besicherten Verpflichtungen der Garantin wenigstens im
     gleichen Rang steht (soweit nicht zwingende gesetzliche Bestimmungen entgegenstehen).
3.   Sämtliche auf diese Garantie zu zahlenden Beträge sind ohne Einbehalt oder Abzug von oder
     aufgrund von gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen Steuern oder sonstigen Abgaben gleich welcher Art zu
     leisten, die von oder in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder für deren Rechnung oder von oder für
     Rechnung einer politischen Untergliederung oder Steuerbehörde der oder in der Bundesrepublik
     Deutschland auferlegt oder erhoben werden, es sei denn, ein solcher Einbehalt oder Abzug ist
     gesetzlich vorgeschrieben. In diesem Fall wird die Garantin diejenigen zusätzlichen Beträge (die
     "zusätzlichen Beträge") zahlen, die erforderlich sind, damit die den Gläubigern zufließenden
     Nettobeträge nach diesem Einbehalt oder Abzug jeweils den Beträgen entsprechen, die ohne einen
     solchen Einbehalt oder Abzug von den Gläubigern empfangen worden wären; die Verpflichtung zur
     Zahlung solcher zusätzlicher Beträge besteht jedoch nicht im Hinblick auf Steuern und Abgaben, die:
     (a) von einer als Depotbank oder Inkassobeauftragter des Gläubigers handelnden Person oder sonst
         auf andere Weise zu entrichten sind als dadurch, dass die BASF Finance oder die Garantin aus
         den von ihr zu leistenden Zahlungen von Kapital oder Zinsen einen Abzug oder Einbehalt
         vornimmt; oder
     (b) wegen einer gegenwärtigen oder früheren persönlichen oder geschäftlichen Beziehung des
         Gläubigers zur Bundesrepublik Deutschland zu zahlen sind, und nicht allein deshalb, weil
         Zahlungen auf die Schuldverschreibungen aus Quellen in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
         stammen (oder für Zwecke der Besteuerung so behandelt werden) oder dort besichert sind; oder
     (c) aufgrund (i) einer Richtlinie oder Verordnung der Europäischen Union betreffend die Besteuerung
         von Zinserträgen oder (ii) einer zwischenstaatlichen Vereinbarung über deren Besteuerung, an
         der die Bundesrepublik Deutschland oder die Europäische Union beteiligt ist, oder (iii) einer
         gesetzlichen Vorschrift, die diese Richtlinie, Verordnung oder Vereinbarung umsetzt oder befolgt,
         abzuziehen oder einzubehalten sind; oder
     (d) aufgrund einer Rechtsänderung zu zahlen sind, welche später als 30 Tage nach Fälligkeit der
         betreffenden Zahlung von Kapital oder Zinsen oder, wenn dies später erfolgt, ordnungsgemäßer
         Bereitstellung aller fälligen Beträge und einer diesbezüglichen Bekanntmachung gemäß den
         Bedingungen wirksam wird; oder
                                                   156


     (e) aufgrund der Ansässigkeit des Gläubigers in einem nicht-kooperativen Staat oder Gebiet im
         Sinne des Gesetzes zur Abwehr von Steuervermeidung und unfairem Steuerwettbewerb
         (Steueroasen-Abwehrgesetz) vom 25. Juni 2021 in seiner jeweils gültigen Fassung (einschließlich
         etwaiger auf der Grundlage dieses Gesetzes erlassener Verordnungen) zu zahlen sind.
4.   Die Garantin verpflichtet sich gegenüber jedem Gläubiger, solange Schuldverschreibungen
     ausstehen, jedoch nur bis zu dem Zeitpunkt, an dem alle Beträge an Kapital und Zinsen dem Fiscal
     Agent zur Verfügung gestellt worden sind, keine gegenwärtigen oder zukünftigen
     Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeiten und keine Garantien oder andere Gewährleistungen dafür durch Grund-
     oder Mobiliarpfandrechte an ihrem Vermögen zu besichern, oder eine solche Besicherung zu diesem
     Zweck bestehen zu lassen, ohne gleichzeitig die Gläubiger an derselben Sicherheit oder an solchen
     anderen Sicherheiten, die von einem internationalen angesehenen unabhängigen Wirtschaftsprüfer
     als gleichwertige Sicherheit anerkannt werden, im gleichen Rang und gleichem Verhältnis teilnehmen
     zu lassen. "Kapitalmarktverbindlichkeit" ist jede Verbindlichkeit hinsichtlich der Rückzahlung
     aufgenommener Geldbeträge, die durch Schuldverschreibungen oder sonstige Wertpapiere mit einer
     ursprünglichen Laufzeit von mehr als einem Jahr, die an einer Börse oder an einem anderen
     anerkannten Wertpapiermarkt notiert oder gehandelt werden oder werden können, verbrieft oder
     verkörpert ist.
5.   Die Verpflichtungen der Garantin aus dieser Garantie (i) sind selbständig und unabhängig von den
     Verpflichtungen der BASF Finance aus den Schuldverschreibungen und (ii) bestehen ohne Rücksicht
     auf die Rechtmäßigkeit, Gültigkeit, Verbindlichkeit und Durchsetzbarkeit der Schuldverschreibungen.
6.   Die Verpflichtungen der Garantin aus dieser Garantie erstrecken sich, ohne dass eine weitere
     Handlung durchgeführt werden oder ein weiterer Umstand entstehen muss, auf solche
     Verpflichtungen jeglicher nicht mit der Garantin identischen neuen Emittentin, die infolge einer
     Schuldnerersetzung gemäß den anwendbaren Bestimmungen der Bedingungen in Bezug auf
     jedwede Schuldverschreibung entstehen.
7.   Diese Garantie erstreckt sich auf sämtliche Schuldverschreibungen, die am oder nach dem Datum
     dieser Garantie von der BASF Finance unter dem Programm begeben werden.
8.   Diese Garantie und alle hierin enthaltenen Vereinbarungen sind ein Vertrag zu Gunsten der Gläubiger
     der Schuldverschreibungen als begünstigte Dritte gemäß § 328 Abs. 1 BGB und begründen das
     Recht eines jeden Gläubigers, die Erfüllung der hierin eingegangenen Verpflichtungen unmittelbar von
     der Garantin zu fordern und diese Verpflichtungen unmittelbar gegenüber der Garantin
     durchzusetzen.
     Ein Gläubiger einer Schuldverschreibung kann im Falle der Nichterfüllung von Zahlungen auf die
     Schuldverschreibungen zur Durchsetzung dieser Garantie unmittelbar gegen die Garantin Klage
     erheben, ohne dass zunächst ein Verfahren gegen die BASF Finance eingeleitet werden müßte.
9.   Die Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, mit der die hierin enthaltenen Vereinbarungen getroffen
     werden, handelt als Fiscal Agent nicht als Beauftragte, Treuhänderin oder in einer ähnlichen
     Eigenschaft für die Gläubiger von Schuldverschreibungen.
10. Die hierin verwendeten und nicht anders definierten Begriffe haben die ihnen in den Bedingungen
    zugewiesene Bedeutung.
11. Die auf die Schuldverschreibungen Anwendung findenden Bestimmungen über die Änderung der
    Anleihebedingungen und den Gemeinsamen Vertreter gelten sinngemäß auch für diese Garantie.
12. Diese Garantie unterliegt dem Recht der Bundesrepublik Deutschland.
13. Diese Garantie ist in deutscher Sprache abgefasst und in die englische Sprache übersetzt. Die
    deutschsprachige Fassung ist verbindlich und allein maßgeblich.
14. Das Original dieser Garantie wird der Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft ausgehändigt und von dieser
    verwahrt.
15. Ausschließlicher Gerichtsstand für alle Rechtsstreitigkeiten gegen die Garantin aus oder im
    Zusammenhang mit dieser Garantie ist Frankfurt am Main, Bundesrepublik Deutschland.
16. Jeder Gläubiger einer Schuldverschreibung kann in jedem Rechtsstreit gegen die Garantin und in
    jedem Rechtsstreit, in dem er und die Garantin Partei sind, seine aus dieser Garantie hervorgehenden
    Rechte auf der Grundlage einer von einer vertretungsberechtigten Person der Deutsche Bank
    Aktiengesellschaft beglaubigten Kopie dieser Garantie ohne Vorlage des Originals im eigenen Namen
    wahrnehmen und durchsetzen.
                                           157


[ ] 2022
BASF SE


Wir akzeptieren die Bestimmungen der vorstehenden Garantie ohne Obligo, Gewährleistung oder
Rückgriff auf uns.
[ ] 2022
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
                                                   158


                                            GUARANTEE

                                          (English translation)
                                                    of

                  BASF SE, Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Federal Republic of Germany,
     for the benefit of the holders of notes (the "Notes"), issued by BASF Finance Europe N.V.,
               Arnhem, The Netherlands, under the EUR 20,000,000,000 Debt Issuance
                                        Program (the "Program")
WHEREAS:
(A) BASF SE ("BASF") and BASF Finance Europe N.V. ("BASF Finance") intend to issue Notes under
    the Program from time to time, the outstanding aggregate principal amount of which will not exceed
    the Program Amount.
(B) The Notes will be issued with Terms and Conditions under German law (as amended, supplemented
    or modified by the applicable Final Terms, the "Conditions").
(C) BASF SE (the "Guarantor") wishes to guarantee the due payment of principal and interest and any
    other amounts payable in respect of any and all Notes that may be issued by BASF Finance under the
    Program.
IT IS AGREED AS FOLLOWS:
(1) The Guarantor unconditionally and irrevocably guarantees to the holder of each Note (which
    expression shall include any Temporary Global Note or Permanent Global Note representing Notes)
    (each a "Holder") issued by BASF Finance now or at any time hereafter under the Program, the due
    and punctual payment of the principal of, and interest on, the Notes and any other amounts which may
    be expressed to be payable under any Note, as and when the same shall become due, in accordance
    with the Conditions.
(2) This Guarantee constitutes an irrevocable, unsecured (subject to paragraph (4) hereunder) and
    unsubordinated obligation of the Guarantor and ranks pari passu with all other present or future
    unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Guarantor outstanding from time to time, subject to
    any obligations preferred by law.
(3) All amounts payable in respect of this Guarantee shall be made without withholding or deduction for or
    on account of any present or future taxes or duties of whatever nature imposed or levied by way of
    withholding or deduction by or on behalf of the Federal Republic of Germany or any political
    subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax unless such withholding or
    deduction is required by law. In such event, the Guarantor will pay such additional amounts (the
    "Additional Amounts") as shall be necessary in order that the net amounts received by the Holders,
    after such withholding or deduction shall equal the respective amounts which would otherwise have
    been receivable in the absence of such withholding or deduction; except that no such Additional
    Amounts shall be payable on account of any taxes or duties which:
    (a) are payable by any person acting as custodian bank or collecting agent on behalf of a Holder, or
        otherwise in any manner which does not constitute a deduction or withholding by BASF Finance
        or the Guarantor from payments of principal or interest made by it, or
    (b) are payable by reason of the Holder having, or having had, some personal or business connection
        with the Federal Republic of Germany or another member state of the European Union and not
        merely by reason of the fact that payments in respect of the Notes are, or for purposes of taxation
        are deemed to be, derived from sources in, or are secured in, the Federal Republic of Germany, or
    (c) are deducted or withheld pursuant to (i) any European Union Directive or Regulation concerning
        the taxation of interest income, or (ii) any international treaty or understanding relating to such
        taxation and to which the Federal Republic of Germany or the European Union is a party, or (iii)
        any provision of law implementing, or complying with, or introduced to conform with, such
        Directive, Regulation, treaty or understanding, or
    (d) are payable by reason of a change in law that becomes effective more than 30 days after the
        relevant payment becomes due, or is duly provided for and notice thereof is published in
        accordance with the Conditions, whichever occurs later, or
    (e) are payable by reason of the Holder residing in a non-cooperative state or territory as defined in
        the German Defense Against Tax Haven Act (Gesetz zur Abwehr von Steuervermeidung und
        unfairem Steuerwettbewerb – Steueroasen-Abwehrgesetz) of June 25, 2021, as amended or
        replaced from time to time (including any ordinance enacted based on this law).
                                                          159


(4) The Guarantor undertakes towards each Holder, so long as any of the Notes remains outstanding, but
    only up to the time all amounts of principal and interest have been placed at the disposal of the Fiscal
    Agent, not to provide security upon any of its assets for any present or future Capital Market
    Indebtedness or any guarantees or other indemnities resulting therefrom, without at the same time
    having the Holders share equally and rateably in such security or such other security as shall be
    approved by an independent accounting firm of internationally recognized standing as being
    equivalent security. "Capital Market Indebtedness" means any obligation for the repayment of
    borrowed money which is in the form of, or represented or evidenced by, bonds, notes or other
    securities, with an original maturity of more than one year, which are, or are capable of being, quoted,
    listed, dealt in or traded on a stock exchange or other recognized securities market.
(5) The obligations of the Guarantor under this Guarantee (i) shall be separate and independent from the
    obligations of BASF Finance under the Notes, and (ii) shall exist irrespective of the legality, validity
    and binding effect or enforceability of the Notes.
(6) The obligations of the Guarantor under this Guarantee shall, without any further act or thing being
    required to be done or to occur, extend to the obligations of any Substitute Debtor which is not the
    Guarantor arising in respect of any Note by virtue of a substitution pursuant to the Conditions.
(7) This Guarantee is given in respect of any and all Notes which are or will be issued by BASF Finance
    under the Program on or after the date hereof.
(8) This Agreement and all undertakings contained herein constitute a contract for the benefit of the Holders
    from time to time as third party beneficiaries pursuant to § 328 (1) BGB (German Civil Code)(1). They
    give rise to the right of each such Holder to require performance of the obligations undertaken herein
    directly from the Guarantor, and to enforce such obligations directly against the Guarantor.
    Any Holder has the right in case of non-performance of any payments on the Notes to enforce the
    Guarantee by filing a suit directly against the Guarantor without the need to take prior proceedings
    against BASF Finance.
(9) Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft which accepted this Guarantee, in its capacity as Fiscal Agent does
    not act in a relationship of agency or trust, a fiduciary or in any other similar capacity for the Holders.
(10) Terms used in this Agreement and not otherwise defined herein shall have the meaning attributed to
     them in the Conditions.
(11) The provisions regarding the Amendment of the Terms and Conditions and the Holders'
     Representative applicable to the Notes shall be applicable mutatis mutandis also to this Guarantee.
(12) This Agreement shall be governed by, and construed in accordance with, German law.
(13) This Agreement is written in the German language and attached hereto is a non-binding English
     translation.
(14) The original version of this Agreement shall be delivered to, and kept by, Deutsche Bank
     Aktiengesellschaft.
(15) Exclusive place of jurisdiction for all legal proceedings arising out of or in connection with this
     Agreement against the Guarantor shall be Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany.
(16) On the basis of a copy of this Agreement certified as being a true copy by a duly authorized officer of
     Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft each Holder may protect and enforce in his own name his rights
     arising under this Agreement in any legal proceedings against the Guarantor or to which such Holder
     and the Guarantor are parties, without the need for production of this Agreement in such proceedings.
[ ] 2022
BASF SE


We accept the terms of the above Guarantee without recourse, warranty or liability.
[ ] 2022
Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft




1
    An English language translation of § 328 (1) BGB (German Civil Code) reads as follow: "A Contract may stipulate
    performance for the benefit of a third party, to the effect that the third party acquires the right directly to demand
    performance."
                                                             160




(1)[MiFID II Product Governance – Solely for the purposes of [the/each] manufacturer's product approval
process, the target market assessment in respect of the Notes has led to the conclusion that: (i) the target
market for the Notes is eligible counterparties[,][and] professional clients [and retail clients], each as
defined in Directive 2014/65/EU (as amended, "MiFID II") [and [●]]; [EITHER(2): and (ii) all channels for
distribution of the Notes are appropriate, including investment advice, portfolio management, non-advised
sales and pure execution services] [OR(3): (ii) all channels for distribution to eligible counterparties and
professional clients are appropriate; and (iii) the following channels for distribution of the Notes to retail
clients are appropriate - investment advice[,][and] portfolio management[,][and] [non-advised sales] [and
pure execution services][, subject to the distributor's suitability and appropriateness obligations under
MiFID II, as applicable]]. Any person subsequently offering, selling or recommending the Notes (a
"distributor") should take into consideration the manufacturer['s][s'] target market assessment; however,
a distributor subject to MiFID II is responsible for undertaking its own target market assessment in respect
of the Notes (by either adopting or refining the manufacturer['s][s'] target market assessment) and
determining appropriate distribution channels[, subject to the distributor's suitability and appropriateness
obligations under MiFID II, as applicable](4).]

( 5 )[UK MIFIR product governance / [Retail investors,] Professional investors and Eligible
Counterparties target market – Solely for the purposes of [the/each] manufacturer’s product approval
process, the target market assessment in respect of the Notes has led to the conclusion that: (i) the target
market for the Notes is [retail clients, as defined in point (8) of Article 2 of Delegated Regulation (EU) No
2017/565 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018
("EUWA"), and] [only] eligible counterparties, as defined in the FCA Handbook Conduct of Business
Sourcebook ("COBS") and professional clients, as defined in Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 as it forms part
of domestic law by virtue of the [EUWA] [European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018] ("UK MiFIR");
[EITHER(6) and (ii) all channels for distribution of the Notes are appropriate[, including investment advice,
portfolio management, non-advised sales and pure execution services] [OR( 7 ) (ii) all channels for
distribution to eligible counterparties and professional clients are appropriate; and (iii) the following
channels for distribution of the Notes to retail clients are appropriate - investment advice[,/ and] portfolio
management[,/ and][ non-advised sales] [and pure execution services][, subject to the distributor’s
suitability and appropriateness obligations under COBS, as applicable]]. Any person subsequently
offering, selling or recommending the Notes (a "distributor") should take into consideration the
manufacturer[’s/s’] target market assessment; however, a distributor subject to the FCA Handbook
Product Intervention and Product Governance Sourcebook (the "UK MiFIR Product Governance Rules")
is responsible for undertaking its own target market assessment in respect of the Notes (by either adopting
or refining the manufacturer[‘s/s’] target market assessment) and determining appropriate distribution
channels[, subject to the distributor’s suitability and appropriateness obligations under COBS, as
applicable](8).]

[PROHIBITION OF SALES TO EEA RETAIL INVESTORS – The Notes are not intended to be offered,
sold or otherwise made available to and should not be offered, sold or otherwise made available to any
retail investor in the European Economic Area ("EEA"). For these purposes, a retail investor means a


(1)     To be include if parties have determined a target market.
.
(2)     Include for notes that are not ESMA complex pursuant to the Guidelines on complex debt instruments and structured
        deposits (ESMA/2015/1787) (the "ESMA Guidelines") (i.e. Notes the Terms and Conditions of which do not provide
        for a put and/or call right).

(3)     Include for notes that are ESMA complex pursuant to the ESMA Guidelines. This list may need to be amended, for
        example, if advised sales are deemed necessary. If there are advised sales, a determination of suitability and
        appropriateness will be necessary. In addition, if the Notes constitute "complex" products, pure execution services to
        retail clients are not permitted without the need to make the determination of appropriateness required under Article
        25(3) of MiFID II.

(4)     If there are advised sales, a determination of suitability will be necessary.
        .
(5)     To be included if parties have determined a target market and if the managers in relation to the Notes are subject to
        UK MiFIR, i.e. there are UK MiFIR manufacturers.

(6)     Include for notes that are not ESMA complex (in the UK context, as reflected in COBS).

(7)     Include for notes that are ESMA complex (in the UK context, as reflected in COBS).

(8)     If there are advised sales, a determination of suitability will be necessary.
                                                             161




person who is one (or more) of: (i) a retail client as defined in point (11) of Article 4(1) of MiFID II; (ii) a
customer within the meaning of Directive 2016/97/EU (as amended), where that customer would not
qualify as a professional client as defined in point (10) of Article 4(1) of MiFID II; or (iii) not a qualified
investor as defined in Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 (as amended, the "Prospectus Regulation").
Consequently no key information document required by Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014 (as amended, the
"PRIIPs Regulation") for offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available to retail
investors in the EEA has been prepared and therefore offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making
them available to any retail investor in the EEA may be unlawful under the PRIIPs Regulation.](9)

[PROHIBITION OF SALES TO UK RETAIL INVESTORS – The Notes are not intended to be offered, sold
or otherwise made available to and should not be offered, sold or otherwise made available to any retail
investor in the United Kingdom ("UK"). For these purposes, a retail investor means a person who is one
(or more) of: (i) a retail client, as defined in point (8) of Article 2 of Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2017/565
as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the European Union (Withdrawal) Act 2018 ("EUWA"); (ii) a
customer within the meaning of the provisions of the FSMA and any rules or regulations made under the
FSMA to implement Directive (EU) 2016/97, where that customer would not qualify as a professional
client, as defined in point (8) of Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 600/2014 as it forms part of domestic
law by virtue of the EUWA; or (iii) not a qualified investor as defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EU)
2017/1129 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the EUWA. Consequently no key information
document required by Regulation (EU) No 1286/2014 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the
EUWA (the "UK PRIIPs Regulation") for offering or selling the Notes or otherwise making them available
to retail investors in the UK has been prepared and therefore offering or selling the Notes or otherwise
making them available to any retail investor in the UK may be unlawful under the UK PRIIPs
Regulation.](10)




(9)     Include this legend if "Applicable" is specified in Part II. C.4 of the Final Terms regarding item "Prohibition of Sales to
        EEA and UK Retail Investors".

(10)    Include this legend if "Applicable" is specified in Part II. C.4 of the Final Terms regarding item "Prohibition of Sales to
        UK Retail Investors".
                                                             162




In case of Notes listed on the official list of and admitted to trading on the regulated market of the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange or publicly offered in the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Final Terms of Notes will be displayed on the website of
the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu). In the case of Notes publicly offered in one or more member states of the
European Economic Area other than the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Final Terms will be displayed on the website of
BASF Group (www.BASF.com).


                                  FORM OF FINAL TERMS
                          (MUSTER FÜR ENDGÜLTIGE BEDINGUNGEN)
                                                                                                                       [Date]
                                                                                                                     [Datum]
                                                Final Terms
                                           Endgültige Bedingungen
                                       [BASF SE][BASF Finance Europe N.V.]
                                     [Title of relevant Tranche of Notes]
                      [Bezeichnung der betreffenden Tranche der Schuldverschreibungen]
                                          Series No.: [     ] / Tranche No.: [ ]
                                          Serien Nr.: [     ] / Tranche Nr.: [ ]
                                                   Issue Date: [ ](11)
                                                 Tag der Begebung: [ ]
       issued pursuant to the EUR 20,000,000,000 Debt Issuance Program dated September 9, 2022
                                of BASF SE and BASF Finance Europe N.V.
        begeben aufgrund des EUR 20.000.000.000 Debt Issuance Program vom 9. September 2022
                               der BASF SE und BASF Finance Europe N.V.

                                                     Important Notice

These Final Terms have been prepared for the purpose of Article 8(5) in conjunction with Article 25(4) of the
Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 of the European Parliament and of the Council of June 14, 2017, as amended,
and must be read in conjunction with the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus pertaining to the Program
dated September 9, 2022 (the "Prospectus") [and the supplement(s) dated []]. The Prospectus and any
supplement thereto are available for viewing in electronic form on the website of the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange (www.bourse.lu) and on the website of BASF Group (www.BASF.com) and copies may be
obtained from BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Germany. Full information is
only available on the basis of the combination of the Prospectus, any supplement and these Final Terms.
[A summary of the individual issue of the Notes is annexed to these Final Terms.](12)
                                                   Wichtiger Hinweis
Diese Endgültigen Bedingungen wurden für die Zwecke von Artikel 8 Abs. 5 i.V.m. Artikel 25 Abs. 4 der
Verordnung (EU) 2017/1129 des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates vom 14. Juni 2017, in der
jeweils geänderten Fassung, abgefasst und sind in Verbindung mit dem Debt Issuance Program Prospekt
vom 9. September 2022 über das Programm (der "Prospekt") [und dem(den) Nachtrag(Nachträgen) dazu
vom []] zu lesen. Der Prospekt sowie etwaige Nachträge können in elektronischer Form auf der
Internetseite der Luxemburger Börse (www.bourse.lu) und der Internetseite der BASF Gruppe
(www.BASF.com) eingesehen werden. Kopien sind erhältlich unter BASF SE, Carl-Bosch-Str. 38, 67056
Ludwigshafen am Rhein, Deutschland. Um sämtliche Angaben zu erhalten, sind die Endgültigen
Bedingungen, der Prospekt und etwaige Nachträge im Zusammenhang zu lesen. [Eine
Zusammenfassung der einzelnen Emission der Schuldverschreibungen ist diesen Endgültigen
Bedingungen angefügt.](7)




(11) The Issue Date is the date of payment and issue of the Notes. In the case of free delivery, the Issue Date is the delivery
     date.
     Der Tag der Begebung ist der Tag, an dem die Schuldverschreibungen begeben und bezahlt werden. Bei freier Lieferung
     ist der Tag der Begebung der Tag der Lieferung.
 12
( ) Not applicable in the case of an issue of Notes with a minimum denomination of at least EUR 100,000.
     Nicht anwendbar im Fall einer Emission von Schuldverschreibungen mit einer Mindeststückelung in Höhe von mindestens
     EUR 100.000.
                                                                163




                                            Part I.: TERMS AND CONDITIONS
                                             Teil I.: ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN
[A. In the case the options applicable to the relevant Tranche of Notes are to be determined by
replicating the relevant provisions set forth in the Prospectus as Option I or Option II including
certain further options contained therein, respectively, and completing the relevant placeholders,
insert:(13)
A. Falls die für die betreffende Tranche von Schuldverschreibungen geltenden Optionen durch
Wiederholung der betreffenden im Prospekt als Option I oder Option II aufgeführten Angaben
(einschließlich der jeweils enthaltenen bestimmten weiteren Optionen) bestimmt und die
betreffenden Leerstellen vervollständigt werden, einfügen:(13)

The Terms and Conditions applicable to the Notes (the "Conditions") [and the [German] [English]
language translation thereof,] are as set out below.
Die für die Schuldverschreibungen geltenden Anleihebedingungen (die "Bedingungen") [sowie die
[deutschsprachige][englischsprachige] Übersetzung] sind wie nachfolgend aufgeführt.

[in the case of Notes with fixed interest rates replicate here the relevant provisions of Option I
[A][B][C][D][E][F][G][H][I] including relevant further options contained therein, and complete relevant
placeholders]
[im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen mit fester Verzinsung hier die betreffenden Angaben der Option I
[A][B][C][D][E][F][G][H][I]    (einschließlich der betreffenden weiteren Optionen) wiederholen und
betreffende Leerstellen vervollständigen]

[in the case of Notes with floating interest rates replicate here the relevant provisions of Option II including
relevant further options contained therein, and complete relevant placeholders]
[im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen mit variabler Verzinsung hier die betreffenden Angaben der Option II
(einschließlich der betreffenden weiteren Optionen) wiederholen und betreffende Leerstellen
vervollständigen]]

[B. In the case the options applicable to the relevant Tranche of Notes are to be determined by
referring to the relevant provisions set forth in the Prospectus as Option I or Option II including
certain further options contained therein, respectively, insert:
B. Falls die für die betreffende Tranche von Schuldverschreibungen geltenden Optionen, die durch
Verweisung auf die betreffenden im Prospekt als Option I oder Option II aufgeführten Angaben
(einschließlich der jeweils enthaltenen bestimmten weiteren Optionen) bestimmt werden, einfügen:
This Part I. of the Final Terms is to be read in conjunction with the set of Terms and Conditions that apply
to Notes with [fixed] [floating] interest rates (the "Terms and Conditions") set forth in the Prospectus as
[Option I [A][B][C][D][E][F][G][H](14)] [Option II]. Capitalized terms shall have the meanings specified in
the Terms and Conditions.
Dieser Teil I. der Endgültigen Bedingungen ist in Verbindung mit dem Satz der Anleihebedingungen, der
auf Schuldverschreibungen mit             [fester] [variabler]   Verzinsung     Anwendung findet (die
"Anleihebedingungen"), zu lesen, der als [Option I [A][B][C][D][E][F][G][H](14)] [Option II] im Prospekt
enthalten ist. Begriffe, die in den Anleihebedingungen definiert sind, haben dieselbe Bedeutung, wenn sie
in diesen Endgültigen Bedingungen verwendet werden.




(13) To be determined in consultation with the Issuer. It is anticipated that this type of documenting the Conditions will be
     required where the Notes are to be publicly offered, in whole or in part, or to be initially distributed, in whole or in part, to
     non-qualified investors. Delete all references to B. Part I of the Final Terms including numbered paragraphs and
     subparagraphs of the Terms and Conditions.
     In Abstimmung mit der Emittentin festzulegen. Es ist vorgesehen, dass diese Form der Dokumentation der Bedingungen
     erforderlich ist, wenn die Schuldverschreibungen insgesamt oder teilweise anfänglich an nicht qualifizierte Anleger
     verkauft oder öffentlich angeboten werden. Alle Bezugnahmen auf B. Teil I der Endgültigen Bedingungen einschließlich
     der Paragraphen und Absätze der Anleihebedingungen entfernen.
(14) In case of an increase of an issue of Notes which were originally issued prior to the date of this Prospectus, the Terms and
     Conditions of the Tranches have to be identical in all respects, but may have different issue dates, interest
     commencement dates, issue prices and dates for first interest payments.
     Im Fall einer Aufstockung einer Emission von Schuldverschreibungen, die ursprünglich vor dem Datum dieses Prospekts
     begeben wurden, müssen die Anleihebedingungen der Tranchen in jeder Hinsicht identisch sein, können aber
     unterschiedliche Begebungstage, Verzinsungsbeginne, Ausgabepreise und erste Zinszahlungstage haben.
                                                            164




All references in this Part I. of the Final Terms to numbered paragraphs and subparagraphs are to
paragraphs and subparagraphs of the Terms and Conditions.
Bezugnahmen in diesem Teil I. der Endgültigen Bedingungen auf Paragraphen und Absätze beziehen sich
auf die Paragraphen und Absätze der Anleihebedingungen.
The blanks in the provisions of the Terms and Conditions, which are applicable to the Notes shall be
deemed to be completed by the information contained in the Final Terms as if such information were
inserted in the blanks of such provisions. All provisions in the Terms and Conditions corresponding to
items in these Final Terms which are either not selected or not completed or which are deleted shall be
deemed to be deleted from the Terms and Conditions applicable to the Notes (the "Conditions").
Die Leerstellen in den auf die Schuldverschreibungen anwendbaren Bestimmungen der
Anleihebedingungen gelten als durch die in den Endgültigen Bedingungen enthaltenen Angaben
ausgefüllt, als ob die Leerstellen in den betreffenden Bestimmungen durch diese Angaben ausgefüllt
wären. Sämtliche Bestimmungen der Anleihebedingungen, die sich auf Variablen dieser Endgültigen
Bedingungen beziehen, die weder angekreuzt noch ausgefüllt oder die gestrichen werden, gelten als in
den auf die Schuldverschreibungen anwendbaren Anleihebedingungen (die "Bedingungen") gestrichen.


CURRENCY, DENOMINATION, FORM, CERTAIN DEFINITIONS (§ 1)
WÄHRUNG, STÜCKELUNG, FORM, DEFINITIONEN (§ 1)
Currency and Denomination
Währung und Stückelung
   Specified Currency                                                                                                [      ]
   Festgelegte Währung
   Aggregate Principal Amount                                                                                        [      ]
   Gesamtnennbetrag
   Aggregate Principal Amount in words                                                                               [      ]
   Gesamtnennbetrag in Worten
   Specified Denomination(15)                                                                                        [      ]
   Festgelegte Stückelung
 Permanent Global Note (TEFRA C and/or Notes kept in custody by or on behalf of CDS)
  Dauerglobalurkunde (TEFRA C und/oder Schuldverschreibungen, die von oder für CDS
  verwahrt werden)
 Temporary Global Note exchangeable for Permanent Global Note (TEFRA D)
  Vorläufige Globalurkunde austauschbar gegen Dauerglobalurkunde (TEFRA D)
Clearing System
Clearing System
 Clearstream Banking AG
 Clearstream Banking S.A.
 Euroclear Bank SA/NV
 CDS & Co., as nominee for CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc.
  CDS & Co., als Beauftragte für CDS Clearing and Depository Services Inc.
Global Note(16)
Globalurkunde
 Classical Global Note
 New Global Note


(15) The minimum denomination of the Notes will be, if in euro, EUR 1,000, and, if in any currency other than euro, an amount
     in such other currency nearly equivalent to EUR 1,000 at the time of the issue of the Notes.
     Die Mindeststückelung der Schuldverschreibungen beträgt EUR 1.000, bzw., falls die Schuldverschreibungen in einer
     anderen Währung als Euro begeben werden, einem Betrag in dieser anderen Währung, der zur Zeit der Begebung der
     Schuldverschreibungen annähernd dem Gegenwert von EUR 1.000 entspricht.
(16) Complete for Notes kept in custody on behalf of the ICSDs.
      Im Fall von Schuldverschreibungen, die im Namen der ICSDs verwahrt werden, ausfüllen.
                                                               165




INTEREST (§ 3)
ZINSEN (§ 3)
 Fixed Rate Notes (Option I [A][B][C][D][E][F][G][H](17))
  Festverzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen (Option I [A][B][C][D][E][F][G][H])


        single Rate of Interest during term
          einheitlicher Zinssatz während der Laufzeit
          Rate of Interest                                                                       [      ] per cent. per annum
          Zinssatz                                                                                        [     ]% per annum
                                                                                                                   [ [ ] to [ ]]
                                                                                                                  [ [ ] bis [ ]]


        different Rates of Interest during term
         verschiedene Zinssätze während der Laufzeit
              from (and including)                     to (but excluding)                   per cent. per annum
              vom (einschließlich)                    bis (ausschließlich)                     % per annum
                [specified dates]                      [specified dates]                      [specified rates]
                    [Daten]                                [Daten]                               [Zinssätze]
          Interest Commencement Date                                                                                      [      ]
          Verzinsungsbeginn
          Fixed Interest Date(s)                                                                                          [      ]
          Festzinstermin(e)
          First Interest Payment Date                                                                                     [      ]
          Erster Zinszahlungstag
        Initial Broken Amount per Specified Denomination                                                                 [      ]
         Anfänglicher Bruchteilzinsbetrag je festgelegter Stückelung
        Fixed Interest Date preceding the Maturity Date                                                                  [      ]
         Festzinstermin, der dem Fälligkeitstag vorangeht
        Final Broken Amount per Specified Denomination                                                                   [      ]
         Abschließender Bruchteilzinsbetrag je festgelegter Stückelung
 Floating Rate Notes (Option II)
  Variabel verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen (Option II)
       Interest Payment Dates
       Zinszahlungstage
          Interest Commencement Date                                                                                      [      ]
          Verzinsungsbeginn
        Specified Interest Payment Dates                                                                                 [      ]
         Festgelegte Zinszahlungstage
        Specified Interest Period(s)                                                            [number] [weeks][months]
         Festgelegte Zinsperiode(n)                                                                [Zahl] [Wochen][Monate]
       Business Day Convention
       Geschäftstagskonvention
        Modified Following Business Day Convention
         Modifizierte-Folgender-Geschäftstag-Konvention


(17)    Insert "A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F", "G" or "H", as applicable, in the case of an increase of an issue of Notes which were
        originally issued prior to the date of this Prospectus.
        "A", "B", "C", "D", "E", "F", "G" oder "H", soweit anwendbar, einfügen im Fall der Aufstockung einer Emission von
        Schuldverschreibungen, die ursprünglich vor dem Datum dieses Prospekts begeben wurde.
                                                              166




        FRN Convention (specify period(s))                                                 [number] months
         FRN Konvention (Zeitraum angeben)                                                     [Zahl] Monate
        Following Business Day Convention
         Folgender-Geschäftstag-Konvention
       Business Day
       Geschäftstag
        Relevant financial centre(s)                                                                  [       ]
         Relevante(s) Finanzzentrum(en)
        TARGET
         TARGET
       Rate of Interest
       Zinssatz
        EURIBOR
         EURIBOR
       Margin                                                                      [    ] per cent. per annum
       Marge                                                                             [     ] % per annum
        plus
         Plus
        minus
         Minus
Day Count Fraction(18)
Zinstagequotient
 Actual/Actual (ICMA Rule 251)
  Actual/Actual (ICMA Regelung 251)
        annual interest payment (excluding the case of short or long coupons)
         jährliche Zinszahlung (ausschließlich des Falls von kurzen oder langen Kupons)
        annual interest payment (including the case of short coupons)
         jährliche Zinszahlung (einschließlich des Falls von kurzen Kupons)
        two or more constant interest periods within an interest year (including the case of short coupons)
         zwei oder mehr gleichbleibende Zinsperioden (einschließlich des Falls von kurzen Kupons)
        calculation period is longer than one reference period (long coupon)
         Zinsberechnungszeitraum ist länger als eine Bezugsperiode (langer Kupon)
        reference period
         Bezugsperiode
          Deemed Interest Payment Date                                                                 [       ]
          Fiktiver Zinszahlungstag
 Actual/365 (Fixed)
 Actual/360
 30/360 or 360/360 or Bond Basis
 30E/360 or Eurobond Basis


PAYMENTS (§ 4)(19)
ZAHLUNGEN (§ 4)
Payment Business Day
Zahlungstag

(18)    Complete for all Notes.
        Für alle Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(19)    Complete for fixed rate Notes.
        Für fest verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
                                                            167




 Relevant financial centre(s)                                                                           [     ]
  Relevante(s) Finanzzentrum(en)
 TARGET
  TARGET


REDEMPTION (§ 5)
RÜCKZAHLUNG (§ 5)
Redemption at Maturity
Rückzahlung bei Endfälligkeit
 Maturity Date(20)                                                                                      [     ]
  Fälligkeitstag
 Redemption Month(21)                                                                                   [     ]
  Rückzahlungsmonat
Early Redemption
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung
Early Redemption for Reasons of a Change of Control                                                   [Yes/No]
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung aufgrund eines Kontrollwechsels                                                [Ja/Nein]
Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer at Specified Call Redemption Amount(s)(22)                [Yes/No]
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin zu festgelegtem(n) Wahlrückzahlungs-
betrag/-beträgen (Call)                                                                               [Ja/Nein]
 Specified Call Redemption Date(s)
  festgelegte Wahlrückzahlungstag(e) (Call)                                                              [     ]
 Specified Call Redemption Amount(s)                                                                    [     ]
  festgelegte Wahlrückzahlungsbetrag/-beträge (Call)
Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer at Early Redemption Amount(23)                           [Yes/No]
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin zum Vorzeitigen Rückzahlungsbetrag                    [Ja/Nein]
Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer at Specified Call Redemption Amount(24)        [Yes/No]
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin zu festgelegtem(n) Wahlrückzahlungsbetrag/-beträgen
(Call)                                                                                      [Ja/Nein]
 Interest payment date [number] years after the Interest Commencement Date
  and each Interest Payment Date thereafter
  Zinszahlungstag [Zahl] Jahre nach dem Verzinsungsbeginn und an jedem
  darauf folgenden Zinszahlungstag
Early Redemption at the Option of a Holder at Specified Put Redemption Amount(s)(25)                   [Yes/No]
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl des Gläubigers zu festgelegtem(n) Wahlrückzahlungs-
betrag/-beträgen (Put)                                                                                [Ja/Nein]
 Put Redemption Date(s)                                                                                 [     ]
  Wahlrückzahlungstag(e) (Put)
 Put Redemption Amount(s)                                                                               [     ]
  Wahlrückzahlungsbetrag/-beträge (Put)
Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer for Inconvertibility, Non-transferability or Illiquidity(26) [Yes/No]

(20)   Complete for fixed rate Notes.
       Für fest verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(21)   Complete for floating rate Notes.
       Für variabel verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(22)   Complete for fixed rate Notes.
       Für fest verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(23)   Complete for fixed rate Notes.
       Für fest verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(24)   Complete for floating rate Notes.
       Für variabel verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(25)   Complete for fixed rate Notes.
       Für fest verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(26)   Complete for fixed rate Notes denominated in Renminbi.
                                                              168




Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin wegen Fehlender Konvertierbarkeit,                             [Ja/Nein]
Fehlender Übertragbarkeit oder Illiquidität
Purchase; Early Redemption at the option of the Issuer for Reason of Minimal
Outstanding Amount                                                                                            [Yes/No]
Rückkauf; Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin bei
geringem ausstehendem Nennbetrag                                                                              [Ja/Nein]
Early Redemption at the Option of the Issuer upon publication of a Transaction Trigger Notice( 27) [Yes/No]
Vorzeitige Rückzahlung nach Wahl der Emittentin nach Veröffentlichung einer                        [Ja/Nein]
Transaktions-Mitteilung
       Trigger Call Redemption Amount                                                                            [     ]
       Ereignis-Wahl-Rückzahlungsbetrag
       Transaction Trigger Event Period                                      from [issue date] to [date end of period]
       Transaktionsauslösende Ereignisfrist
                                                      vom [Begebungstag] bis zum [Datum Ende des Zeitraums]
       Description of transaction in respect of which the Notes are issued for
       refinancing purposes or in relation to which the occurence of a
       Transaction Trigger Event shall give rise to the redemption right                               [specify details]
       Beschreibung der Transaktion bezüglich derer die
       Schuldverschreibungen zu Finanzierungszwecken begeben wurden oder
       in Bezug auf die das Eintreten eines Transaktionsauslösenden
       Ereignisses das Kündigungsrecht auslöst                                                  [Einzelheiten einfügen]
       Transaction Trigger Event                                                                       [specify details]
       Transaktionsauslösendes Ereignis                                                         [Einzelheiten einfügen]


Early Redemption Amount(28)
Vorzeitiger Rückzahlungsbetrag
      Higher of Final Redemption Amount and Present Value
       Rückzahlungsbetrag, oder falls höher, abgezinster Marktwert
       Comparable Benchmark Yield of corresponding                                          plus [percentage] per cent.
       Vergleichbare Benchmark Rendite der entsprechenden                                    zuzüglich [Prozentsatz]%
        euro denominated benchmark debt security of the Federal Republic of Germany
         Euro-Referenz-Anleihe der Bundesrepublik Deutschland
        UK government Sterling denominated benchmark debt security issued by HM Treasury
         durch HM Treasury begebenen Sterling-Referenzanleihe des Vereinigten Königreichs
        Swiss franc denominated benchmark federal bond of the Swiss Confederation
         Schweizer Franken-Referenz-Bundesanleihe der Schweizerischen Eidgenossenschaft
        U.S. dollar denominated benchmark U.S. Treasury debt security
         Referenz-U.S. Staatsanleihe (US Treasury debt security) in U.S. Dollar


THE FISCAL AGENT[,] [AND] THE PAYING AGENT [AND THE CALCULATION AGENT] (§ 6)
DER FISCAL AGENT[,] [UND] DIE ZAHLSTELLE [UND DIE BERECHNUNGSSTELLE] (§ 6)
       Fiscal and Paying Agent                                              [Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft] [       ]
       Fiscal Agent und Zahlstelle                                          [Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft] [       ]
       Calculation Agent                                                                         [Not applicable][     ]
       Berechnungsstelle                                                                      [Nicht anwendbar][       ]



        Für fest verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen, die auf Renminbi lauten.
(27)    Complete for fixed rate Notes.
        Für festverzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
(28)    Complete for fixed rate Notes.
        Für fest verzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen auszufüllen.
                                                              169




AMENDMENT OF THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS, HOLDERS' REPRESENTATIVE[, AMENDMENT
OF THE GUARANTEE] (§ 11)
ÄNDERUNG DER ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN, GEMEINSAMER VERTRETER[, ÄNDERUNG DER
GARANTIE] (§ 11)
 Appointment of a Holders' Representative by resolution passed by Holders and not in the Terms and
  Conditions
  Bestellung eines gemeinsamen Vertreters der Gläubiger durch Beschluss der Gläubiger und nicht in
  den Anleihebedingungen
 Appointment of a Holders' Representative in the Terms and Conditions
  Bestellung eines gemeinsamen Vertreters der Gläubiger in den Anleihebedingungen
    Name and address of the Holders' Representative                                                     [specify details]
    Name und Anschrift des gemeinsamen Vertreters                                                [Einzelheiten einfügen]


NOTICES (§ 13)
MITTEILUNGEN (§ 13)
Place and medium of publication
Ort und Medium der Bekanntmachung
 Website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu)
  Internetseite der Luxemburger Wertpapierbörse (www.bourse.lu)
 Clearing System
  Clearing System
LANGUAGE OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS (§ 15)(29)
SPRACHE DER ANLEIHEBEDINGUNGEN (§ 15)
 German and English (German controlling)
  Deutsch und Englisch (deutscher Text maßgeblich)
 English and German (English controlling)
  Englisch und Deutsch (englischer Text maßgeblich)
 English only
  Ausschließlich Englisch
 German only(30)
  Ausschließlich Deutsch]




(29) To be determined in consultation with the Issuer. It is anticipated that, subject to any stock exchange or legal
     requirements applicable from time to time, and unless otherwise agreed, in the case of Notes in bearer form publicly
     offered, in whole or in part, in the Federal Republic of Germany, or distributed, in whole or in part, to non-qualified
     investors in the Federal Republic of Germany, German will be the controlling language. If, in the event of such public offer
     or distribution to non-qualified investors, however, English is chosen as the controlling language, a German language
     translation of the Conditions will be available at the principal office of BASF SE.
     In Abstimmung mit der Emittentin festzulegen. Es wird erwartet, dass vorbehaltlich geltender Börsen- oder anderer
     Bestimmungen und soweit nicht anders vereinbart, die deutsche Sprache für Inhaberschuldverschreibungen maßgeblich
     sein wird, die insgesamt oder teilweise öffentlich zum Verkauf in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland angeboten oder an
     nicht qualifizierte Anleger in der Bundesrepublik Deutschland verkauft werden, wird. Falls bei einem solchen öffentlichen
     Verkaufsangebot oder Verkauf an nicht qualifizierte Anleger die englische Sprache als maßgeblich bestimmt wird, wird
     eine deutschsprachige Übersetzung der Bedingungen bei der Hauptgeschäftsstelle der BASF SE erhältlich sein.
(30) Use only in the case of Notes not publicly offered and/or not intended to be listed on any regulated market within the
     European Economic Area.
     Nur im Fall Schuldverschreibungen zu nutzen, die nicht öffentlich angeboten und nicht an einem geregelten Markt
     innerhalb des Europäischen Wirtschaftsraums zum Handel zugelassen werden sollen.
                                                              170




                                      Part II.: ADDITIONAL INFORMATION(31)
                                      Teil II.: ZUSÄTZLICHE INFORMATIONEN
A. Essential information
   Grundlegende Angaben
Interests of Natural and Legal Persons involved in the Issue/Offer
Interessen von Seiten natürlicher und juristischer Personen,
die an der Emission/dem Angebot beteiligt sind
 So far as the Issuer
  is aware, no person involved in the offer of the Notes has an
  interest material to the offer, except that certain Dealers and their
  affiliates may be customers of, and borrowers from the Issuer and
  its affiliates. In addition, certain Dealers and their affiliates have
  engaged, and may in the future engage, in investment banking and/or
  commercial banking transactions with, and may perform services for
  the Issuer and its affiliates in the ordinary course of business.
  Nach Kenntnis der Emittentin bestehen bei den an der Emission
  beteiligten Personen keine Interessen, die für das Angebot
  bedeutsam sind, außer, dass bestimmte Platzeure und mit ihnen
  verbundene Unternehmen Kunden von und Kreditnehmer der
  Emittentin und mit ihr verbundener Unternehmen sein können.
  Außerdem sind bestimmte Platzeure an Investment Banking-
  Transaktionen und/oder Commercial Banking-Transaktionen mit
  der Emittentin beteiligt, oder könnten sich in Zukunft daran beteiligen,
  und könnten im gewöhnlichen Geschäftsverkehr Dienstleistungen
  für die Emittentin und mit ihr verbundene Unternehmen erbringen.
 Other interest (specify)                                                                                  [Specify details]
  Andere Interessen (angeben)                                                                        [Einzelheiten einfügen]
Reasons for the offer and use of proceeds
Gründe für das Angebot und Verwendung der Erträge
    Reasons for the offer to the public or for the admission to trading(32)                                 [Specify details]
    Gründe für das öffentliche Angebot oder die Zulassung zum Handel                                 [Einzelheiten einfügen]
    Use of proceeds(33)                                                                                       [Specify details]

    Zweckbestimmung der Erlöse                                                                         [Einzelheiten einfügen]
                                 34
    Estimated net proceeds( )                                                                                            [       ]
    Geschätzter Nettobetrag der Erlöse
    Estimated total expenses of the issue(35)                                                                            [       ]
    Geschätzte Gesamtkosten der Emission



(31) There is no obligation to complete Part II. of the Final Terms in its entirety in case of Notes with a Specified Denomination
     of at least EUR 100,000 or its equivalent in any other currency, provided that such Notes will not be listed on any
     regulated market within the European Economic Area. To be completed in consultation with the Issuer.
     Es besteht keine Verpflichtung, Teil II. der Endgültigen Bedingungen bei Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten
     Stückelung von mindestens EUR 100.000 oder dem Gegenwert in einer anderen Währung vollständig auszufüllen, sofern
     diese Schuldverschreibungen nicht an einem geregelten Markt innerhalb des Europäischen Wirtschaftsraums zum
     Handel zugelassen werden. In Absprache mit der Emittentin auszufüllen.
 32
( ) Not to be completed in case of Notes with a Specified Denomination of at least EUR 100,000.
     Nicht auszufüllen bei Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von mindestens EUR 100.000.
(33) See paragraph "Use of Proceeds" in the Prospectus. If reasons for the offer or use of proceeds are different from general
     financing purposes of the BASF Group, include those reasons here.
     Siehe Abschnitt "Use of Proceeds" im Prospekt. Sofern die Gründe für das Angebot oder die Verwendung der Erträge
     nicht in allgemeinen Finanzierungszwecken der BASF-Gruppe bestehen, sind die Gründe hier anzugeben.
(34) If proceeds are intended for more than one principal use, will need to split up and present in order of priority.Not to be
     completed      in   case    of    Notes      with    a    Specified     Denomiation       of   at    least    EUR    100,000.
     Sofern die Erträge für verschiedene wichtige Verwendungszwecke bestimmt sind, sind diese aufzuschlüsseln und nach
     der Priorität der Verwendungszwecke darzustellen. Nicht auszufüllen bei Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten
     Stückelung von mindestens EUR 100.000.
(35) Not to be completed in case of Notes with a Specified Denomination of at least EUR 100,000.
     Nicht auszufüllen bei Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von mindestens EUR 100.000.
                                                          171




B. Information concerning the securities to be offered /admitted to trading
   Informationen über die anzubietenden bzw. zum Handel zuzulassenden Wertpapiere
Securities Identification Numbers
Wertpapier-Kenn-Nummern
   Common Code                                                                                                    [      ]
   Common Code
   International Security Identification Number (ISIN)                                                            [      ]
   Internationale Wertpapier-Identifikationsummer (ISIN)
   German Securities Code                                                                                         [      ]
   Wertpapier-Kenn-Nummer (WKN)
   Any other securities number                                                                                    [      ]
   Sonstige Wertpapierkennnummer
Eurosystem eligibility(36)
EZB-Fähigkeit
   Intended to be held in a manner which would allow Eurosystem eligibility                                    [Yes/No]
   Soll in EZB-fähiger Weise gehalten werden                                                                   [Ja/Nein]
   [Note that the designation "yes" in the case of an NGN means that the Notes are intended upon issue
   to be deposited with one of the ICSDs as common safekeeper and does not necessarily mean that the
   Notes will be recognised as eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy and intra-day credit
   operations by the Eurosystem either upon issue or at any or all times during their life. Such recognition
   will depend upon satisfaction of the Eurosystem eligibility criteria.]
   [Whilst the designation is specified as "no" at the date of these Final Terms, should the Eurosystem
   eligibility criteria be amended in the future such that the Notes are capable of meeting them the Notes
   in the case of an NGN may then be deposited with one of the ICSDs as common safekeeper. Note that
   this does not necessarily mean that the Notes will then be recognised as eligible collateral for
   Eurosystem monetary policy and intraday credit operations by the Eurosystem at any time during their
   life. Such recognition will depend upon the ECB being satisfied that Eurosystem eligibility criteria have
   been met.]
   [Es wird darauf hingewiesen, dass "ja" im Fall einer NGN hier lediglich bedeutet, dass die
   Schuldverschreibungen nach ihrer Begebung bei einem der ICSDs als gemeinsamen Verwahrer
   verwahrt werden; es bedeutet nicht notwendigerweise, dass die Schuldverschreibungen bei ihrer
   Begebung, zu irgendeinem Zeitpunkt während ihrer Laufzeit oder während ihrer gesamten Laufzeit als
   zulässige Sicherheiten für die Zwecke der Geldpolitik oder für Innertageskredite des Eurosystems
   anerkannt werden. Eine solche Anerkennung ist abhängig davon, ob die Zulassungskriterien des
   Eurosystems erfüllt sind.]
   [Auch wenn die Bezeichnung mit Datum dieser Endgültigen Bedingungen "nein" lautet, sollten die
   Zulassungskriterien       des   Eurosystems      sich     zukünftig    dergestalt ändern,     dass     die
   Schuldverschreibungen diese erfüllen können, könnten die Schuldverschreibungen im Fall einer NGN
   dann bei einem der ICSDs als gemeinsamen Verwahrer verwahrt werden. Es wird darauf hingewiesen,
   dass dies jedoch nicht notwendigerweise bedeutet, dass die Schuldverschreibungen dann zu
   irgendeinem Zeitpunkt während ihrer Laufzeit als zulässige Sicherheiten für die Zwecke der Geldpolitik
   oder für Innertageskredite des Eurosystems anerkannt werden. Eine solche Anerkennung ist abhängig
   davon, ob die Zulassungskriterien des Eurosystems erfüllt sind.]
Historic Interest Rates and further performance as well as volatility(37)
Zinssätze der Vergangenheit und künftige Entwicklungen sowie ihre Volatilität
Details of historic [EURIBOR] rates
and the future performance as well as their volatility
can be obtained (not free of charge)
by electronic means from                                                   [Reuters [EURIBOR01]][Not applicable]

(36) Select "Yes" if the Notes are in NGN form and are to be kept in custody by an ICSD as common safekeeper or if the
     Notes are in CGN form and to be kept in custody by Clearstream Banking AG, Frankfurt. Select "No" if the Notes are in
     NGN form and are to be kept in custody by the common service provider as common safekeeper.
     "Ja" wählen, falls die Schuldverschreibungen in Form einer NGN begeben und von einem ICSD als common safekeeper
     gehalten werden sollen oder falls die Schuldverschreibungen in Form einer CGN begeben und von Clearstream Banking
     AG, Frankfurt gehalten werden sollen. "Nein" wählen, falls die Schuldverschreibungen in Form einer NGN begeben und
     vom common service provider als common safekeeper gehalten werden sollen.
                                                           172




Einzelheiten zu vergangenen [EURIBOR] Sätzen
und Informationen über künftige Wertentwicklungen sowie ihre Volatilität
können (nicht kostenfrei)
auf elektronischem Weg abgerufen werden
unter                                                        [Reuters [EURIBOR01]][Nicht anwendbar]
Description of any market disruption or settlement disruption events                      [Not applicable][Please see
that effect the [EURIBOR] rates                                                      § 3 of the Terms and Conditions]
Beschreibung etwaiger Ereignisse, die eine Störung des Marktes oder                     [Nicht anwendbar][Bitte siehe
der Abrechnung bewirken und die [EURIBOR] Sätze beeinflussen                             § 3 der Anleihebedingungen]
Yield to final maturity(38)                                                                             [      ] per cent.
Rendite bei Endfälligkeit                                                                                        [     ]%
Representation of debt security holders including an identification
of the organization representing the investors and provisions applying
to such representation. Indication of the website where the public may have
free access to the contracts relation to these forms of representation(39) [Not applicable] [Specify details]
Vertretung der Schuldtitelinhaber unter Angabe der die
Anleger vertretenden Organisation und der für diese Vertretung
geltenden Bestimmungen. Angabe der Webseite, auf der die
Öffentlichkeit die Verträge, die diese Repräsentationsformen regeln,
kostenlos einsehen kann                                           [Nicht anwendbar] [Einzelheiten einfügen]
Resolutions, authorizations and approvals by virtue
of which the Notes will be created                                                                      [Specify details]
Beschlüsse, Ermächtigungen und Genehmigungen, welche die
Grundlage für die Schaffung der Schuldverschreibungen bilden                                    [Einzelheiten einfügen]
If different from the issuer, the identity and contact details of the offeror
of the Notes and/or the person asking for admission to trading,
including the legal entity identifier (LEI), if any                                                     [Specify details]
Sofern Anbieter und Emittent nicht identisch sind, Angabe der Identität,
der Kontaktdaten des Anbieters der Schuldtitel
und/oder der die Zulassung zum Handel beantragenden Person
einschließlich der Rechtsträgerkennung (LEI), wenn vorhanden.                                   [Einzelheiten einfügen]

C.   Terms and conditions of the offer of Notes to the public(40)
     Bedingungen und Konditionen des öffentlichen Angebots
     von Schuldverschreibungen
C.1 Conditions, offer statistics, expected timetable and actions required to apply
    for the offer                                                                   [Not applicable]
    Bedingungen, Angebotsstatistiken, erwarteter Zeitplan und erforderliche Maßnahmen
    für die Antragstellung                                                       [Nicht anwendbar]
Conditions to which the offer is subject                                                               [Specify details]
Bedingungen, denen das Angebot unterliegt                                                       [Einzelheiten einfügen]
Time period, including any possible amendments,
during which the offer will be open and description of the application process                          [Specify details]
Frist – einschließlich etwaiger Änderungen –
innerhalb derer das Angebot gilt und Beschreibung des Antragsverfahrens                         [Einzelheiten einfügen]
A description of the possibility to reduce subscriptions and the manner
for refunding amounts paid in excess by applicants                                                      [Specify details]


(37) Only applicable for Floating Rate Notes. Not required for Notes with a Specified Denomination of at least EUR 100,000.
     Nur bei variabel verzinslichen Schuldverschreibungen anwendbar. Nicht anwendbar auf Schuldverschreibungen mit einer
     festgelegten Stückelung von mindestens EUR 100.000.
(38) Only applicable for Fixed Rate Notes.
     Nur für festverzinsliche Schuldverschreibungen anwendbar.
(39) Specify further details in the case a Holders' Representative will be appointed in § 11 of the Conditions.
     Weitere Einzelheiten für den Fall einfügen, dass § 11 der Bedingungen einen Gemeinsamen Vertreter bestellt.
(40) Complete with respect to a public offer of Notes with a Specified Denomination of less than EUR 100,000.
     Bei öffentlichem Angebot von Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von weniger als EUR 100.000
     auszufüllen.
                                                         173




Beschreibung der Möglichkeit zur Reduzierung der Zeichnungen und
der Art und Weise der Erstattung des zu viel gezahlten Betrags an die Zeichner               [Einzelheiten einfügen]
Details of the minimum and/or maximum amount of the application (whether in
number of notes or aggregate amount to invest)                                                       [Specify details]
Einzelheiten zum Mindest- und/oder Höchstbetrag der Zeichnung entweder in
Form der Anzahl der Schuldverschreibungen oder des aggregierten zu
investierenden Betrags)                                                                      [Einzelheiten einfügen]
Method and time limits for paying up the notes and for delivery of the notes                         [Specify details]
Methode und Fristen für die Bedienung der Wertpapiere und ihre Lieferung
Manner and date in which results of the offer are to be made public                                  [Specify details]
Art und Weise und Termin, auf die bzw. an dem die Ergebnisse des Angebots
offen zu legen sind                                                                          [Einzelheiten einfügen]
The procedure for the exercise of any right of pre-emption, the negotiability
of subscription rights and the treatment of subscription rights not exercised.                       [Specify details]
Verfahren für die Ausübung eines etwaigen Vorzugsrechts, die Marktfähigkeit
der Zeichnungsrechte und die Behandlung der nicht ausgeübten
Zeichnungsrechte                                                                             [Einzelheiten einfügen]
                                                41
C.2    Plan of distribution and allotment( )                                                        [Not applicable]
       Plan für die Aufteilung der Wertpapiere und deren Zuteilung                               [Nicht anwendbar]
If the Offer is being made simultaneously in the markets of two or more
countries and if a tranche has been or is being reserved for certain
of these, indicate such tranche                                                                      [Specify details]
Erfolgt das Angebot gleichzeitig auf den Märkten zweier oder mehrerer
Länder und wurde/ wird eine bestimmte Tranche einigen dieser Märkte
vorbehalten, Angabe dieser Tranche                                                           [Einzelheiten einfügen]
Process for notifying applicants of the amount allotted and
an indication whether dealing may begin before notification is made                                  [Specify details]
Verfahren zur Meldung gegenüber den Zeichnern über den
zugeteilten Betrag und Angabe, ob eine Aufnahme des Handels vor
der Meldung möglich ist                                                                      [Einzelheiten einfügen]
                 42
C.3    Pricing( )                                                                                   [Not applicable]
       Kursfeststellung                                                                          [Nicht anwendbar]
Expected price at which the Notes will be offered                                                    [Specify details]
Preis, zu dem die Schuldverschreibungen voraussichtlich
angeboten werden                                                                             [Einzelheiten einfügen]
Amount of expenses and taxes charged to the subscriber / purchaser                                   [Specify details]
Kosten/Steuern, die dem Zeichner/Käufer in Rechnung gestellt
werden                                                                                       [Einzelheiten einfügen]
                                      43
C.4    Placing and underwriting( )
       Platzierung und Emission
Name and address of the co-ordinator(s) of the global offer and of
single parts of the offer and, to the extent known to the Issuer or the
offeror, or the placers in the various countries where the offer takes place                                    [       ]
Name und Anschrift des Koordinator/der Koordinatoren des globalen
Angebots oder einzelner Teile des Angebots – sofern der Emittentin
oder dem Anbieter bekannt – in den einzelnen Ländern des Angebots



(41) Complete with respect to a public offer of Notes with a Specified Denomination of less than EUR 100,000.
     Bei öffentlichem Angebot von Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von weniger als EUR 100.000
     auszufüllen.
(42) Complete with respect to a public offer of Notes with a Specified Denomination of less than EUR 100,000.
     Bei öffentlichem Angebot von Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von weniger als EUR 100.000
     auszufüllen.
 43
( ) Complete with respect to a public offer of Notes with a Specified Denomination of less than EUR 100,000.
     Bei öffentlichem Angebot von Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von weniger als EUR 100.000
     auszufüllen.
                                                      174




Method of distribution
Vertriebsmethode
 Non-syndicated
  Nicht syndiziert
 Syndicated
  Syndiziert
Subscription Agreement
Übernahmevertrag
Date of Subscription Agreement                                                                             [     ]
Datum des Übernahmevertrages
Material features of the Subscription Agreement                                                            [     ]
Hauptmerkmale des Übernahmevertrages
Management Details including form of commitment(44)
Einzelheiten bezüglich des Bankenkonsortiums einschließlich der Art der Übernahme
Dealer / Management Group (specify)                                                                        [     ]
Platzeur / Bankenkonsortium (angeben)
 Firm commitment                                                                                          [     ]
  Feste Zusage
 No firm commitment / best efforts arrangements                                                           [     ]
  Ohne feste Zusage / zu den bestmöglichen Bedingungen
Commissions(45)
Provisionen
Management/Underwriting Commission (specify)                                                               [     ]
Management- und Übernahmeprovision (angeben)
Selling Concession (specify)                                                                               [     ]
Verkaufsprovision (angeben)
Prohibition of Sales to EEA Retail Investors(46)                                [Applicable] [Not Applicable]
Verbot des Verkaufs an EWR- Privatanleger                                    [Anwendbar] [Nicht anwendbar]
Prohibition of Sales to UK Retail Investors(47)                                 [Applicable] [Not Applicable]
Verbot des Verkaufs an UK- Privatanleger                                     [Anwendbar] [Nicht anwendbar]
Stabilizing Dealer(s)/Manager(s)                                                       [None] [Specify details]
Kursstabilisierende(r) Platzeur(e)/Manager                                     [Keiner] [Einzelheiten einfügen]
D. Listing and admission to trading                                                                     [Yes/No]
   Börsenzulassung und Notierungsaufnahme                                                               [Ja/Nein]
 Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
  Geregelter Markt der Luxemburger Wertpapierbörse
 Professional segment of the Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
  Professionelles Segment des Geregelten Marktes der Luxemburger Wertpapierbörse




(44) Not required for Notes with a Specified Denomination of at least EUR 100,000.
     Nicht erforderlich bei Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von mindestens EUR 100.000.
(45) To be completed in consultation with the Issuer.
     In Abstimmung mit der Emittentin auszuführen.
(46) Specify "Applicable" if the Notes may constitute "packaged" products pursuant to PRIIPs Regulation and no key
     information document will be prepared in the EEA.
     "Anwendbar" wählen, wenn die Schuldverschreibungen als "verpackte Produkte" nach der PRIIPs Verordnung
     einzuordnen sein könnten und kein Basisinformationsblatt im EWR erstellt wird.
(47) Specify "Applicable" if the Notes may constitute "packaged" products pursuant to PRIIPs Regulation and no key
     information document will be prepared.
     "Anwendbar" wählen, wenn die Schuldverschreibungen als "verpackte Produkte" nach der PRIIPs Verordnung
     einzuordnen sein könnten und kein Basisinformationsblatt erstellt wird.
                                                              175




Date of admission                                                                                                        [       ]
Datum der Zulassung
Estimate of the total expenses related to admission to trading(48)                                                       [       ]
Geschätzte Gesamtkosten für die Zulassung zum Handel
All regulated markets or third country markets, SME Growth Market or MTFs
on which, to the knowledge of the Issuer, notes of the same class of the notes
to be offered to the public or admitted
to trading are already admitted to trading(49)
Angabe sämtlicher geregelter Märkte oder Märkte in Drittstaaten,
KMU-Wachstumsmärkte oder MTFs,
auf denen nach Kenntnis der Emittentin Schuldverschreibungen
der gleichen Wertpapierkategorie, die öffentlich angeboten oder zum Handel
zugelassen werden sollen, bereits zum Handel zugelassen sind
 Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
  Geregelter Markt der Luxemburger Wertpapierbörse
 Professional segment of the Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
  Professionelles Segment des Geregelten Marktes der Luxemburger Wertpapierbörse
Issue Price                                                                                                   [      ] per cent.
Ausgabepreis                                                                                                           [     ]%
Name and address of the entities which have a firm
commitment to act as intermediaries in secondary trading,
providing liquidity through bid and offer rates and description
of the main terms of their commitment                                                     [Not applicable] [Specify details]
Name und Anschrift der Institute, die aufgrund einer festen
Zusage als Intermediäre im Sekundärhandel tätig sind und
Liquidität mittels Geld- und Briefkursen erwirtschaften,
und Beschreibung der Hauptbedingungen der
Zusagevereinbarung                                                            [Nicht anwendbar] [Einzelheiten einfügen]

E. Additional Information
   Zusätzliche Informationen
Rating(50)                                                                                                               [       ]
Rating
[Specify whether the relevant rating agency is established in the European Community and is registered or
has applied for registration pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of September 16, 2009 on credit rating agencies, as amended, (the "CRA Regulation").
The European Securities and Markets Authority ("ESMA") publishes on its website
(https://www.esma.europa.eu/supervision/credit-rating-agencies/risk) a list of credit rating agencies
registered in accordance with the CRA Regulation. That list is updated within five working days following
the adoption of a decision under Article 16, 17 or 20 CRA Regulation. The European Commission shall
publish that updated list in the Official Journal of the European Union within 30 days following such
update.]
[Einzelheiten einfügen, ob die jeweilige Ratingagentur ihren Sitz in der Europäischen Gemeinschaft hat
und gemäß Verordnung (EG) Nr. 1060/2009 des Europäischen Parlaments und des Rates vom
16. September 2009 über Ratingagenturen, in der jeweils geltenden Fassung, (die "Ratingagentur-
Verordnung") registriert ist oder die Registrierung beantragt hat.



(48) Not required for Notes with a Specified Denomination of less than EUR 100,000.
     Nicht erforderlich bei Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von weniger als EUR 100.000.
(49) In case of a fungible issue, need to indicate that the original notes are already admitted to trading. Not required for Notes
     with a Specified Denomination of at least EUR 100,000.
     Im Falle einer Aufstockung, die mit einer vorangegangenen Emission fungibel ist, ist die Angabe erforderlich, dass die
     ursprünglichen Schuldverschreibungen bereits zum Handel zugelassen sind. Nicht erforderlich bei
     Schuldverschreibungen mit einer festgelegten Stückelung von mindestens EUR 100.000.
(50) Do not complete, if the Notes are not rated on an individual basis. Include a brief explanation of the meaning of the
     ratings if this has been previously published by the rating provider.
     Nicht auszufüllen, wenn kein Einzelrating für die Schuldverschreibungen vorliegt. Kurze Erläuterung der Bedeutung des
     Ratings einfügen, wenn dieses unlängst von der Ratingagentur erstellt wurde.
                                                            176




Die Europäische Wertpapier und Marktaufsichtsbehörde ("ESMA") veröffentlicht auf ihrer Webseite
(https://www.esma.europa.eu/supervision/credit-rating-agencies/risk) ein Verzeichnis der nach der
Ratingagentur-Verordnung registrierten Ratingagenturen. Dieses Verzeichnis wird innerhalb von fünf
Werktagen nach Annahme eines Beschlusses gemäß Artikel 16, 17 oder 20 der Ratingagentur-
Verordnung aktualisiert. Die Europäische Kommission veröffentlicht das aktualisierte Verzeichnis im
Amtsblatt der Europäischen Union innerhalb von 30 Tagen nach der Aktualisierung.]
[Listing and admission to trading:(51)
Börsenzulassung und Notierungsaufnahme:
The above Final Terms comprise the details required for admittance to trading and to list this issue of
Notes (as from [insert Issue Date for the Notes]) pursuant to the EUR 20,000,000,000 Debt Issuance
Program of BASF SE and BASF Finance Europe N.V.
Die vorstehenden Endgültigen Bedingungen enthalten die Angaben, die für die Zulassung und
Notierungsaufnahme dieser Emission von Schuldverschreibungen gemäß dem EUR 20.000.000.000 Debt
Issuance Program der BASF SE und der BASF Finance Europe N.V. (ab dem [Tag der Begebung der
Schuldverschreibungen einfügen]) erforderlich sind.]

F. Information to be provided regarding the consent by the Issuer or person responsible for
   drawing up the Prospectus
   Zur Verfügung zu stellende Informationen über die Zustimmung des Emittenten oder der für die
   Erstellung des Prospekts zuständigen Person
Offer period during which subsequent resale or final placement of the Notes
by Dealers and/or further financial intermediaries can be made            [Not applicable] [Specify details]
Angebotsfrist, während derer die spätere Weiterveräußerung
oder endgültige Platzierung von Wertpapieren durch die Platzeure oder
weitere Finanzintermediäre erfolgen kann                        [Nicht anwendbar] [Einzelheiten einfügen]
[THIRD PARTY INFORMATION
INFORMATIONEN VON SEITEN DRITTER
With respect to any information included herein and specified to be sourced from a third party (i) the Issuer
confirms that any such information has been accurately reproduced and as far as the Issuer is aware and
is able to ascertain from information available to it from such third party, no facts have been omitted the
omission of which would render the reproduced information inaccurate or misleading and (ii) the Issuer
has not independently verified any such information and accepts no responsibility for the accuracy thereof.
Hinsichtlich der hierin enthaltenen und als solche gekennzeichneten Informationen von Seiten Dritter gilt
Folgendes: (i) Die Emittentin bestätigt, dass diese Informationen zutreffend wiedergegeben worden sind
und – soweit es der Emittentin bekannt ist und sie aus den von diesen Dritten zur Verfügung gestellten
Informationen ableiten konnte – keine Fakten weggelassen wurden, deren Fehlen die reproduzierten
Informationen unzutreffend oder irreführend gestalten würden; (ii) die Emittentin hat diese Informationen
nicht selbständig überprüft und übernimmt keine Verantwortung für ihre Richtigkeit.]
[BASF SE
(as Issuer)
(als Emittentin)]




[BASF Finance Europe N.V.
(as Issuer)
(als Emittentin)]




(51) Include only in the version of the Final Terms which is submitted to the relevant stock exchange in the case of Notes to
     be listed on such stock exchange.
     Nur in derjenigen Fassung der Endgültigen Bedingungen einfügen, die der betreffenden Börse, bei der die
     Schuldverschreibungen zugelassen werden sollen, vorgelegt werden.
                                                    177




      DESCRIPTION OF RULES REGARDING RESOLUTIONS OF HOLDERS
The Terms and Conditions pertaining to a certain issue of Notes provide that the Holders may agree to
amendments or decide on other matters relating to the Notes by way of resolution to be passed in a
meeting (Gläubigerversammlung) or by taking votes without a meeting. Any such resolution duly adopted
by resolution of the Holders shall be binding on each Holder of the respective issue of Notes, irrespective
of whether such Holder took part in the vote and whether such Holder voted in favor of or against such
resolution.
In addition to the provisions included in the Terms and Conditions of a particular issue of Notes, the rules
regarding resolutions of Holders contained in the German Act on Debt Securities
(Schuldverschreibungsgesetz aus Gesamtemissionen – "SchVG") are applicable. Under the SchVG,
these rules are largely mandatory, although they permit in limited circumstances supplementary provisions
set out in or incorporated into the Terms and Conditions.
Resolutions of the Holders with respect to the Notes can be passed in a meeting (Gläubigerversammlung)
in accordance with § 5 et seqq. SchVG or by way of a vote without a meeting pursuant to § 18 and § 9 et
seqq. SchVG (Abstimmung ohne Versammlung).
The following is a brief summary of some of the statutory rules regarding the convening and conduct of
meetings of Holders and the taking of votes without meetings, the passing and publication of resolutions
as well as their implementation and challenge before German courts.


Rules regarding Holders' Meetings
Meetings of Holders may be convened by the Issuer or the Holders' Representative, if any. Meetings of
Holders must be convened if one or more Holders holding 5% or more of the outstanding Notes so require
for specified reasons permitted by statute.
Meetings may be convened not less than 14 days prior to the date of the meeting. The Terms and
Conditions may provide that attendance and exercise of voting rights at the meeting may be made subject
to prior registration of Holders. The Terms and Conditions will indicate what proof will be required for
attendance and voting at the meeting. The place of the meeting in respect of a German issuer is the place
of the issuer's registered office, provided, however, that where the relevant Notes are listed on a stock
exchange within the European Union or the European Economic Area, the meeting may be held at the
place of such stock exchange.
The convening notice shall be made publicly available together with the agenda of the meeting setting out
the proposals for resolution.
Each Holder may be represented by proxy. A quorum exists if Holders' representing by value not less than
50% of the outstanding Notes. If the quorum is not reached, a second meeting may be called at which no
quorum will be required, provided that where a resolution may only be adopted by a qualified majority, a
quorum requires the presence of at least 25% of the aggregate principal amount of outstanding Notes.
All resolutions adopted must be properly published. In the case of Notes represented by one or more
Global Notes, resolutions which amend or supplement the Terms and Conditions have to be implemented
by supplementing or amending the relevant Global Note(s).
In insolvency proceedings instituted in Germany against an Issuer, a Holders' Representative, if
appointed, is obliged and exclusively entitled to assert the Holders' rights under the Notes. Any resolutions
passed by the Holders are subject to the provisions of the German Insolvency Code (Insolvenzordnung).
If a resolution constitutes a breach of the statute or the Terms and Conditions, Holders may bring an
action to set aside such resolution. Such action must be filed with the competent court within one month
following the publication of the resolution.


Specific Rules regarding Votes without Meeting
In the case of resolutions to be passed by Holders without a meeting, the rules applicable to Holders'
Meetings apply mutatis mutandis to any taking of votes by Holders without a meeting, subject to certain
special provisions. The following summarizes such special rules.
The voting shall be conducted by the person presiding over the taking of votes. Such person shall be (i) a
notary public appointed by the Issuer, (ii) where a common representative of the Holders (the "Holders'
Representative") has been appointed, the Holders' Representative if the vote was solicited by the
Holders' Representative, or (iii) a person appointed by the competent court.
                                                    178




The notice soliciting the Holders' votes shall set out the period within which votes may be cast. During
such voting period, the Holders may cast their votes to the person presiding over the taking of votes. Such
notice shall also set out in detail the conditions to be met for the votes to be valid.
The person presiding over the taking of votes shall ascertain each Holder's entitlement to cast a vote
based on evidence provided by such Holder and shall prepare a list of the Holders entitled to vote. If it is
established that no quorum exists, the person presiding over the taking of votes may convene a meeting of
the Holders. Within one year following the end of the voting period, each Holder participating in the vote
may request a copy of the minutes of such vote and any annexes thereto from the Issuer.
Each Holder participating in the vote may object in writing to the result of the vote within two weeks
following the publication of the resolutions passed. The objection shall be decided upon by the person
presiding over the taking of votes. If he remedies the objection, the person presiding over the taking of
votes shall promptly publish the result. If the person presiding over the taking of votes does not remedy the
objection, he shall promptly inform the objecting Holder in writing.
The Issuer shall bear the costs of the vote and, if the court has convened a meeting, also the costs of such
proceedings.
                                                 179




                                      USE OF PROCEEDS
The net proceeds from each issue of Notes by BASF will be used for general corporate purposes unless
stated otherwise in the applicable Final Terms. The net proceeds from each issue of Notes by BASF
Finance will only be lent to or invested in companies belonging to the same group of companies to which
BASF Finance belongs.
                                     180




                           TAXATION WARNING
THE TAX LEGISLATION OF THE MEMBER STATE OF PROSPECTIVE PURCHASERS OF NOTES,
THE ISSUER'S AND/OR THE GUARANTOR'S COUNTRIES OF INCORPORATION MAY HAVE AN
IMPACT ON THE INCOME RECEIVED FROM THE NOTES. PROSPECTIVE PURCHASERS OF NOTES
ARE ADVISED TO CONSULT THEIR OWN TAX ADVISORS AS TO THE TAX CONSEQUENCES OF
THE PURCHASE, OWNERSHIP AND DISPOSITION OF NOTES INCLUDING THE EFFECT OF ANY
STATE OR LOCAL TAXES, UNDER THE TAX LAWS APPLICABLE IN GERMANY, THE
NETHERLANDS, THE GRAND DUCHY OF LUXEMBOURG, THE REPUBLIC OF IRELAND, THE
REPUBLIC OF AUSTRIA AND EACH COUNTRY OF WHICH THEY ARE RESIDENTS OR OTHERWISE
SUBJECT TO TAXATION.
                                                      181




                                      SELLING RESTRICTIONS
The Dealers have entered into an amended and restated dealer agreement dated September 9, 2022 (the
"Dealer Agreement") as a basis upon which they or any of them may from time to time agree to purchase
Notes.

1. General
Each Dealer has represented and agreed that it will comply with all applicable laws and regulations in
force in any jurisdiction in which it purchases, offers, sells or delivers Notes or possesses or distributes this
Prospectus and will obtain any consent, approval or permission required by it for the purchase, offer, sale
or delivery by it of Notes under the laws and regulations in force in any jurisdiction to which it is subject or
in which it makes such purchases, offers, sales or deliveries and neither the Issuer nor the Guarantor (if
BASF Finance is the Issuer) nor any other Dealer shall have any responsibility therefor.

2. United States of America (the "United States")
(a) Each Dealer has acknowledged that the Notes have not been and will not be registered under the
    Securities Act and may not be offered or sold within the United States except pursuant to an exemption
    from, or in a transaction not subject to, the registration requirements of the Securities Act. Each Dealer
    has represented and agreed that it has not offered or sold, and will not offer or sell, any Note
    constituting part of its allotment within the United States except in accordance with Rule 903 of
    Regulation S under the Securities Act. Accordingly, each Dealer further has represented and agreed
    that neither it, nor its affiliates nor any persons acting on its or their behalf have engaged or will engage
    in any directed selling efforts with respect to a Note.
(b) From and after the time that the Issuer notifies the Dealers in writing that it is no longer able to make
    the representation set forth in Clause 4(1)(o)(i) of the Dealer Agreement, each Dealer (i) acknowledges
    that the Notes have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act and may not be
    offered or sold within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons except in
    accordance with Regulation S under the Securities Act or pursuant to an exemption from the
    registration requirements of the Securities Act; (ii) has represented and agreed that it has not offered
    and sold any Notes, and will not offer and sell any Notes, (x) as part of its distribution at any time and
    (y) otherwise until 40 days after the later of the commencement of the offering and closing date, only in
    accordance with Rule 903 of Regulation S under the Securities Act; and accordingly, (iii) has further
    represented and agreed that neither it, its affiliates nor any persons acting on its or their behalf have
    engaged or will engage in any directed selling efforts with respect to any Note, and it and they have
    complied and will comply with the offering restrictions requirements of Regulation S; and (iv) has also
    agreed that, at or prior to confirmation of any sale of Notes, it will have sent to each distributor, dealer
    or person receiving a selling concession, fee or other remuneration that purchases Notes from it during
    the distribution compliance period a confirmation or notice to substantially the following effect:
   "The Securities covered hereby have not been registered under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933, as
   amended (the "Securities Act") and may not be offered or sold within the United States or to, or for the
   account or benefit of, U.S. persons by any person referred to in Rule 903 (b)(2)(iii) (i) as part of its
   distribution at any time or (ii) otherwise until 40 days after the later of the commencement of the
   offering and the closing date, except in either case in accordance with Regulation S under the
   Securities Act. Terms used above have the meanings given to them by Regulation S."
(c) Each Dealer who has purchased Notes of a Tranche hereunder (or in the case of a sale of a Tranche
    of Notes issued to or through more than one Dealer, each of such Dealers as to the Notes of such
    Tranche purchased by or through it or, in the case of a syndicated issue, the relevant Lead Manager)
    shall determine and notify to the Fiscal Agent the completion of the distribution of the Notes of such
    Tranche.
   Terms used in this paragraph 2 have the meanings given to them by Regulation S.
(d) Each Dealer has represented and agreed that it has not entered and will not enter into any contractual
    arrangement with respect to the distribution or delivery of Notes, except with its affiliates or with the
    prior written consent of the Issuer.
(e) Notes will be issued in accordance with the provisions of United States Treasury Regulation § 1.163-
    5(c)(2)(i)(C) (the "C Rules"), or in accordance with the provisions of United States Treasury Regulation
    § 1.163-5(c)(2)(i)(D) (the "D Rules"), (or any successor rules in substantially the same form as the C
    Rules or D Rules, as applicable, for purposes of Section 4701 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code) as
    specified in the applicable Final Terms.
                                                          182




      Where the C Rules are specified in the relevant Final Terms as being applicable to any Tranche of
      Notes, Notes must be issued and delivered outside the United States and its possessions in
      connection with their original issuance. Each Dealer has represented and agreed that it has not offered
      sold or delivered and will not offer, sell or deliver, directly or indirectly, Notes within the United States or
      its possessions in connection with their original issuance. Further, each Dealer has represented and
      agreed in connection with the original issuance of Notes, that it has not communicated, and will not
      communicate, directly or indirectly, with a prospective purchaser if either such Dealer or purchaser is
      within the United States or its possessions and will not otherwise involve its U.S. office in the offer or
      sale of Notes. Terms used in this paragraph have the meanings given to them by the U.S. Internal
      Revenue Code and regulations thereunder, including the C Rules.
      In addition, in respect of Notes issued in accordance with the D Rules, each Dealer has represented
      and agreed that:
      (i) except to the extent permitted under the D Rules, (i) it has not offered or sold, and during the
          restricted period will not offer or sell, Notes to a person who is within the United States or its
          possessions or to a United States person, and (ii) such Dealer has not delivered and will not deliver
          within the United States or its possessions definitive Notes that are sold during the restricted period;
      (ii) it has and throughout the restricted period will have in effect procedures reasonably designed to
           ensure that its employees or agents who are directly engaged in selling Notes are aware that such
           Notes may not be offered or sold during the restricted period to a person who is within the United
           States or its possessions or to a United States person, except as permitted by the D Rules;
      (iii) if such Dealer is a United States person, it represents that it is acquiring the Notes for purposes of
            resale in connection with their original issuance and if such Dealer retains Notes for its own
            account, it will only do so in accordance with the D Rules; and
      (iv) with respect to each affiliate that acquires from such Dealer Notes for the purposes of offering or
           selling such Notes during the restricted period, such Dealer either (x) repeats and confirms the
           representations and agreements contained in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) on such affiliate's behalf or
           (y) agrees that it will obtain from such affiliate for the benefit of the Issuer the representations and
           agreements contained in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii).
      Terms used in this paragraph (e) have the meanings given to them by the U.S. Internal Revenue Code
      and regulations thereunder, including the D Rules.

3. European Economic Area
Unless the Final Terms in respect of any Notes specify the "Prohibition of Sales to EEA Retail Investors"
as "Not Applicable", each Dealer has represented and agreed that it has not offered, sold or otherwise
made available and will not offer, sell or otherwise make available any Notes which are the subject of the
offering contemplated by this Prospectus as completed by the Final Terms in relation thereto to any retail
investor in the European Economic Area. For the purposes of this provision:
(a) the expression "retail investor" means a person who is one (or more) of the following:
      (i) a retail client as defined in point (11) of Article 4(1) of Directive 2014/65/EU (as amended, "MiFID
          II"); or
      (ii) a customer within the meaning of Directive 2016/97/EU (as amended), where that customer would
           not qualify as a professional client as defined in point (10) of Article 4(1) of MiFID II; or
      (iii) not a qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus Regulation; and
(b) the expression an "offer" includes the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient
    information on the terms of the offer and the Notes to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide
    to purchase or subscribe for the Notes.
If the Final Terms in respect of any Notes specify the "Prohibition of Sales to EEA Retail Investors" as "Not
Applicable", in relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area (each, a "Member State"),
each Dealer has represented and agreed that it has not made and will not make an offer of Notes which
are the subject of the offering contemplated by this Prospectus as completed by the Final Terms in relation
thereto to the public in that Member State except that it may make an offer of such Notes to the public in
that Member State:
(a)        if the Final Terms in relation to the Notes specify that an offer of those Notes may be made other
           than pursuant to Article 1(4) of the Prospectus Regulation in that Member State (a "Non-exempt
           Offer"), following the date of publication of a prospectus in relation to such Notes which has been
                                                     183




        approved by the competent authority in that Member State or, where appropriate, approved in
        another Member State and notified to the competent authority in that Member State, provided that
        any such prospectus has subsequently been completed by the Final Terms contemplating such
        Non-exempt Offer, in accordance with the Prospectus Regulation, in the period beginning and
        ending on the dates specified in such prospectus or Final Terms, as applicable and the Issuer has
        consented in writing to its use for the purpose of that Non-exempt Offer;
(b)     at any time to any legal entity which is a qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus
        Regulation;
(c)     at any time to fewer than 150 natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in
        the Prospectus Regulation), subject to obtaining the prior consent of the relevant Dealer or
        Dealers nominated by the Issuer for any such offer; or
(d)     at any time in any other circumstances falling within Article 1(4) of the Prospectus Regulation,
provided that no such offer of Notes referred to in (b) to (d) above shall require the Issuer or any Dealer to
publish a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Regulation, or supplement a prospectus
pursuant to Article 23 of the Prospectus Regulation.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression an "offer of Notes to the public" in relation to any
Notes in any Member State means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient
information on the terms of the offer and the Notes to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to
purchase or subscribe for the Notes and the expression "Prospectus Regulation" means Regulation (EU)
2017/1129, as amended.

4. United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland ("United Kingdom")

Prohibition of Sales to UK Retail Investors
Unless the Final Terms in respect of any Notes specifies "Prohibition of Sales to UK Retail Investors" as
"Not Applicable", each Dealer has represented and agreed, that it has not offered, sold or otherwise made
available and will not offer, sell or otherwise make available any Notes which are the subject of the offering
contemplated by this Prospectus as completed by the Final Terms in relation thereto to any retail investor
in the United Kingdom. For the purposes of this provision:
(a)     the expression "retail investor" means a person who is one (or more) of the following:
        (i)      a retail client, as defined in point (8) of Article 2 of Delegated Regulation (EU) No
                 2017/565 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the European Union (Withdrawal)
                 Act 2018 ("EUWA"); or
        (ii)     a customer within the meaning of the provisions of the FSMA and any rules or regulations
                 made under the FSMA to implement Directive (EU) 2016/97, where that customer would
                 not qualify as a professional client, as defined in point (8) of Article 2(1) of Regulation
                 (EU) No 600/2014 as it forms part of domestic law by virtue of the EUWA; or
        (iii)    not a qualified investor as defined in Article 2 of the UK Prospectus Regulation; and
(b)     the expression an "offer" includes the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient
        information on the terms of the offer and the Notes to be offered so as to enable an investor to
        decide to purchase or subscribe for the Notes.
If the Final Terms in respect of any Notes specifies "Prohibition of Sales to UK Retail Investors" as "Not
Applicable", each Dealer has represented and agreed, that it has not made and will not make an offer of
Notes which are the subject of the offering contemplated by this Prospectus as completed by the Final
Terms in relation thereto to the public in the United Kingdom except that it may make an offer of such
Notes to the public in the United Kingdom:
(A)     if the final terms in relation to the Notes specify that an offer of those Notes may be made other
        than pursuant to section 86 of the FSMA (a "Public Offer"), following the date of publication of a
        prospectus in relation to such Notes which either (i) has been approved by the Financial Conduct
        Authority, or (ii) is to be treated as if it had been approved by the Financial Conduct Authority in
        accordance with the transitional provision in Regulation 74 of the Prospectus (Amendment etc.)
        (EU Exit) Regulations 2019, provided that any such prospectus has subsequently been completed
        by final terms contemplating such Public Offer, in the period beginning and ending on the dates
        specified in such prospectus or final terms, as applicable, and the Issuer has consented in writing
        to its use for the purpose of that Public Offer;
                                                      184




(B)     at any time to any legal entity which is a qualified investor as defined in Article 2 of the UK
        Prospectus Regulation;
(C)     at any time to fewer than 150 natural or legal persons (other than qualified investors as defined in
        Article 2 of the UK Prospectus Regulation) in the United Kingdom subject to obtaining the prior
        consent of the relevant Dealer or Dealers nominated by the Issuer for any such offer; or
(D)     at any time in any other circumstances falling within section 86 of the FSMA,
provided that no such offer of Notes referred to in (B) to (D) above shall require the Issuer or any Dealer to
publish a prospectus pursuant to section 85 of the FSMA or supplement a prospectus pursuant to Article
23 of the UK Prospectus Regulation.
For the purposes of this provision, the expression "an offer of Notes to the public" in relation to any
Notes means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient information on the terms of
the offer and the Notes to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to purchase or subscribe for the
Notes and the expression "UK Prospectus Regulation" means Regulation (EU) 2017/1129 as it forms
part of domestic law by virtue of the EUWA.

Other regulatory restrictions
Each Dealer has represented and agreed, that:
(i)     it has only communicated or caused to be communicated and will only communicate or cause to
        be communicated an invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the meaning
        of section 21 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000, as amended ("FSMA")) received by
        it in connection with the issue or sale of any Notes in circumstances in which section 21(1) of the
        FSMA does not apply to the Issuer or the Guarantor; and
(ii)    it has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to anything
        done by it in relation to the Notes in, from or otherwise involving the United Kingdom.

5. Japan
Each Dealer has acknowledged that the Notes have not been and will not be registered under the
Financial Instruments and Exchange Law of Japan (Law No. 25 of 1948, as amended, the "Financial
Instruments and Exchange Law"). Each Dealer has represented and agreed, that it will not offer or sell
any Notes, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for the benefit of, any resident of Japan (which term as
used herein means any person resident in Japan, including any corporation or other entity organised
under the laws of Japan), or to others for re-offering or resale, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for
the benefit of, any resident of Japan except only pursuant to an exemption from the registration
requirements of, and otherwise in compliance with the Financial Instruments and Exchange Law and any
applicable laws, regulations and guidelines of Japan.

6. Republic of Italy
Unless specified in the relevant Final Terms that a Non-exempt Offer may be made in Italy, the offering of
the Notes has not been registered with the Commissione Nazionale per le Società e la Borsa (CONSOB)
pursuant to Italian securities legislation and, accordingly, no Notes may be offered, sold or delivered, nor
may copies of the Base Prospectus or of any other document relating to the Notes be distributed in the
Republic of Italy, except:
(a)     to qualified investors (investitori qualificati), as defined pursuant to Article 2 of Regulation (EU)
        No. 1129 of 14 June 2017, as amended (the "Prospectus Regulation") and any applicable
        provision of Legislative Decree No. 58 of 24 February 1998, as amended (the "Financial
        Services Act") and/or Italian CONSOB regulations; or
(b)     in any other circumstances which are exempted from the rules on public offerings pursuant to
        Article 1 of the Prospectus Regulation, Article 34-ter of CONSOB Regulation No. 11971 of 14 May
        1999, as amended from time to time, and the applicable Italian laws.
Any offer, sale or delivery of the Notes or distribution of copies of the Base Prospectus or any other
document relating to the Notes in the Republic of Italy under paragraphs (a) or (b) above must:
(i)     be made by an investment firm, bank or financial intermediary permitted to conduct such activities
        in the Republic of Italy in accordance with the Financial Services Act, CONSOB Regulation
        No. 20307 of 15 February 2018 (as amended from time to time), Legislative Decree No. 385 of
                                                    185




        1 September 1993, as amended (the "Italian Banking Act"), and any other applicable laws and
        regulations; and
(ii)    comply with any other applicable laws and regulations or requirement imposed by CONSOB, the
        Bank of Italy (including the reporting requirements, where applicable, pursuant to Article 129 of
        the Italian Banking Act and the implementing guidelines of the Bank of Italy, as amended from
        time to time) and/or any other Italian authority.
Investors should also note that, in connection with the subsequent distribution of the Notes (with a
minimum denomination lower than € 100,000 or its equivalent in another currency) in the Republic of Italy,
in accordance with Article 100-bis of the Financial Services Act, where no exemption from the rules on
public offerings applies under paragraph (a) or (b) above, the subsequent distribution of the Notes on the
secondary market in Italy must be made in compliance with the public offer and the prospectus
requirement rules provided under the Prospectus Regulation and the applicable Italian laws and
regulation. Failure to comply with such rules may result in the sale of such Notes being declared null and
void and in the liability of the intermediary transferring the Notes for any damages suffered by investors.

7.      Switzerland
Unless stated otherwise in the applicable Final Terms,
(a)     each Dealer has represented, warranted and agreed, that, subject to paragraph (b) below:
        (i)      Notes may not be publicly offered, directly or indirectly, in Switzerland within the meaning
                 of the Swiss Financial Services Act of 15 June 2018, as amended (the "FinSA") and will
                 not be admitted to trading on a trading venue (exchange or multilateral trading facility) in
                 Switzerland;
        (ii)     neither this Prospectus nor any Final Terms nor any other offering or marketing material
                 relating to the Notes (x) constitutes a prospectus as such term is understood pursuant to
                 the FinSA or (y) has been or will be filed with or approved by a Swiss review body
                 pursuant to article 52 of the FinSA; and
        (iii)    neither this Prospectus nor any Final Terms nor other offering or marketing material
                 relating to any Notes may be publicly distributed or otherwise made publicly available in
                 Switzerland.
(b)     Notwithstanding paragraph (a) above, in respect of any Tranche of Notes to be issued, the Issuer
        and the relevant Dealers may agree that (x) such Notes may be publicly offered in Switzerland
        within the meaning of the FinSA and/or (y) an application will be made by (or on behalf of) the
        Issuer to admit such Notes to trading on a trading venue (exchange or multilateral trading facility)
        in Switzerland, provided that:
        (i)      the Issuer is able to rely, and is relying, on an exemption from the requirement to prepare
                 and publish a prospectus under the FinSA in connection with such public offer and/or
                 application for admission to trading;
        (ii)     in the case of any such public offer, the relevant Dealers have agreed to comply with any
                 restrictions applicable to the offer and sale of such Notes that must be complied with in
                 order for the Issuer to rely on such exemption; and
        (iii)    the applicable Final Terms will specify that such Notes may publicly offered in Switzerland
                 within the meaning of the FinSA and/or the trading venue in Switzerland to which an
                 application will be made by (or on behalf of) the Issuer to admit such Notes to trading
                 thereon.

8.      Republic of Singapore ("Singapore")
The Prospectus has not been registered as a prospectus with the Monetary Authority of Singapore.
Accordingly, the Notes may not be offered or sold, or be made the subject of an invitation for subscription
or purchase, nor may the Prospectus and any other document or material in connection with the offer or
sale, or invitation for subscription or purchase, of any Notes may not be circulated or distributed, whether
directly or indirectly, to any person in Singapore other than:
(1)     to an institutional investor (as defined in the Securities and Futures Act, 2001 (2020 Revised
        Edition) of Singapore, as amended or modified (the "SFA")) pursuant to Section 274 of the SFA;
                                                       186




(2)      to a relevant person (as defined in Section 275(2) of the SFA) pursuant to Section 275(1) of the
         SFA, or any person pursuant to Section 275(1A) of the SFA, and in accordance with the
         conditions specified in Section 275 of the SFA and where applicable in accordance with the
         conditions in Regulation 3 of the Securities and Futures (Classes of Investors) Regulations 2018;
         or
(3)      otherwise pursuant to, and in accordance with the conditions of, any other applicable provision of
         the SFA.
Where the Notes are subscribed or purchased under Section 275 of the SFA by a relevant person which
is:
         (a)      a corporation (which is not an accredited investor (as defined in the SFA)) the sole
                  business of which is to hold investments and the entire share capital of which is owned by
                  one or more individuals, each of whom is an accredited investor; or
         (b)      a trust (where the trustee is not an accredited investor) whose sole purpose is to hold
                  investments and each beneficiary of the trust is an individual who is an accredited
                  investor, securities (as defined in Section 2(1) of the SFA) or securities-based derivatives
                  contracts (as defined in Section 2(1) of the SFA) of that corporation or the beneficiaries'
                  rights and interest (howsoever described) in that trust shall not be transferred within six
                  months after that corporation or that trust has acquired the Notes pursuant to an offer
                  made under Section 275 of the SFA, except:
                  (i)      to an institutional investor or to a relevant person (as defined in Section 275(2) of
                           the SFA), or to any person arising from an offer referred to in Section 275(1A) or
                           Section 276(4)(c)(ii) of the SFA; or
                  (ii)     where no consideration is or will be given for the transfer; or
                  (iii)    where the transfer is by operation of law; or
                  (iv)     as specified in Section 276(7) of the SFA; or
                  (v)      as specified in Regulation 37A of the Securities and Futures (Offers of
                           Investments) (Securities and Securities-based Derivatives Contracts)
                           Regulations 2018.

9.       Canada

The Notes have not been, and will not be, qualified for sale under the securities laws of Canada or any
province or territory thereof. Each Dealer has represented, warranted and agreed that it has not offered,
sold or distributed and will not offer, sell or distribute any Notes, directly or indirectly, in Canada or to or for
the benefit of any resident of Canada, other than in compliance with applicable securities laws and, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Notes may be sold only to investors purchasing, or deemed to
be purchasing, as principal that are accredited investors, as defined in National Instrument 45-106
Prospectus Exemptions or subsection 73.3(1) of the Securities Act (Ontario), and that are permitted
clients, as defined in National Instrument 31-103 Registration Requirements. Each Dealer has also
represented, warranted and agreed that it has not and will not distribute or deliver this Prospectus, or any
other offering material in connection with any offering of Notes, in Canada other than in compliance with
applicable securities laws.
                                                      187




                                     GENERAL INFORMATION
Application has been made to the Commission, which is the Luxembourg competent authority for the
purpose of the Prospectus Regulation for its approval of this Prospectus.


Interests of Natural and Legal Persons involved in the Issue/Offer
Except as discussed in the relevant Final Terms, certain of the Dealers and their affiliates may be
customers of, borrowers from or creditors of BASF, BASF Finance and its affiliates. In addition, certain
Dealers and their affiliates have engaged, and may in the future engage, in investment banking and/or
commercial banking transactions with, and may perform services for BASF, BASF Finance and its
affiliates in the ordinary course of business and/or for companies involved directly or indirectly in the sector
in which BASF, BASF Finance and its affiliates operate, and for which such Dealers have received or may
receive customary fees, commissions, reimbursement of expenses and indemnification. Certain of the
Dealers may also have positions, deal or make markets in the Notes issued under the Programme,
including (but not limited to) entering into hedging strategies on behalf of the Issuer and its affiliates,
investor clients, or a principal in order to manage their exposure, their general market risk, or other trading
activities. They have received, or may in the future receive, customary fees and commissions for these
transactions.
Furthermore, in the ordinary course of their business activities, the Dealers and their affiliates may make
or hold a broad array of investments and actively trade debt and equity securities (or related derivative
securities) and financial instruments (including bank loans and issuance of financial instruments linked to
the financial instruments of the Issuers and/or the Issuers' affiliates) for their own account and for the
accounts of their customers. Such investments and securities activities may involve securities and/or
instruments of the Issuers or Issuers' affiliates. The Dealers and/or their affiliates may receive allocations
of the Notes (subject to customary closing conditions), which could affect future trading of the Notes.
Certain of the Dealers or their affiliates that have a lending relationship with the Issuers routinely hedge
their credit exposure to the Issuers consistent with their customary risk management policies. Typically,
such Dealers and their affiliates would hedge such exposure by entering into transactions, which consist of
either the purchase of credit default swaps or the creation of short positions in securities, including
potentially the Notes issued under the Program. Any such short positions could adversely affect future
trading prices of Notes issued under the Program. The Dealers and their affiliates may also make
investment recommendations and/or publish or express independent research views in respect of such
securities or financial instruments and may hold, or recommend to clients that they acquire, long and/or
short positions in such securities and instruments.


Authorization
The Board of Executive Directors of BASF (Vorstand) has authorized the establishment of the Program by
a resolution on August 21, 2007. Each issue of Notes under the Program has to be authorized by
resolution of the board of executive directors of BASF.
The Board of Managing Directors of BASF Finance has authorized the establishment of the Program by
resolution on September 5, 2007. Each issue of Notes under the Program has to be authorized by
resolution of the Board of Managing Directors of BASF Finance, which in turn has to be approved by a
resolution of the general meeting of shareholders of BASF Finance.
The increase of the program amount has been authorized by the Board of Executive Directors of BASF
(Vorstand) by a resolution on August 14, 2009 and by the Board of Managing Directors of BASF Finance
by a resolution on September 1, 2009.
The increase of the program amount has been authorized by the Board of Executive Directors of BASF
(Vorstand) by a resolution on July 15, 2014 and by the Board of Managing Directors of BASF Finance by a
resolution on September 15, 2014.


Listing and Admission to Trading
Application has been made to the Luxembourg Stock Exchange for Notes issued under this Prospectus to
be admitted to trading on the Regulated Market or on the professional segment of the Regulated Market of
the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and to be listed on the official list of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange.
                                                      188




Clearing Systems
Notes will be accepted for clearing through one or more Clearing Systems as specified in the applicable
Final Terms. These systems will comprise those operated by Clearstream Banking AG, Neue Börsenstr. 1,
60487 Frankfurt am Main, Federal Republic of Germany ("CBF"), Clearstream Banking S.A., 42 Avenue
JF Kennedy, 1855 Luxembourg, Grand Duchy of Luxembourg ("CBL"), Euroclear Bank SA/NV, Boulevard
du Roi Albert II, 1210 Brussels, Belgium ("Euroclear") and CDS & Co., as nominee for CDS Clearing and
Depository Services Inc. The appropriate German securities number ("WKN") (if any), Common Code and
International Security Identification Number (ISIN) for each Tranche of Notes allocated by CBF, CBL and
Euroclear will be specified in the applicable Final Terms.


Documents Available
The      following   documents       are     available     in     electronic    form     on   the website
https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors.html and copies of the following documents will, when published,
also be available free of charge during normal business hours from the registered office of the relevant
Issuer and from the specified office of the Fiscal Agent for the time being in Frankfurt am Main:
(i)    the constitutional documents (with an English translation where applicable) of each of the Issuers;
(ii)   the audited consolidated annual financial statements of BASF Group in respect of the financial years
       ended 2021 and 2020 and the unaudited interim consolidated financial statements of BASF Group for
       the half-year as of June 30, 2022;
(iii) the audited unconsolidated annual financial statements of BASF in respect of the financial years
      ended 2021 and 2020;
(iv) the audited annual financial statements of BASF Finance in respect of the financial years ended 2021
     and 2020 and the unaudited interim financial statements of BASF Finance for the half-year as of June
     30, 2022;
(v)    copies of this Prospectus, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 14, 2012, the
       Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 11, 2013, the Debt Issuance Program
       Prospectus dated September 16, 2014, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 12,
       2016, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 11, 2017, the Debt Issuance
       Program Prospectus dated September 11, 2018, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated
       September 13, 2019, the Debt Issuance Program dated September 10, 2020, the First Supplement
       dated April 1, 2021 thereto and the Debt Issuance Program dated September 10, 2021;
(vi) any supplement to this Prospectus;
(vii) the Guarantee.
In the case of Notes listed on the official list of and admitted to trading on the regulated market or on the
professional segment of the Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange or publicly offered in
the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Final Terms will be displayed on the website of the Luxembourg
Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu). In the case of Notes publicly offered in one or more member states of
the European Economic Area other than the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg, the Final Terms will be
displayed on the website of BASF group (www.BASF.com).
                                                  189




                    DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

Documents Incorporated by Reference
The following documents which have been published or which are published simultaneously with this
Prospectus and filed with the Commission shall be incorporated in, and form part of, this Prospectus:
(a) the published audited consolidated annual financial statements of BASF Group (English language
    version) dated December 31, 2020 and December 31, 2021, in each case including the auditor's report
    thereon;
(b) the published audited financial statements 2021 of BASF Finance as well as the auditor's report
    thereon and its published audited financial statements 2020 including the auditor's report thereon;
(c) the published unaudited interim consolidated financial statements of BASF Group as of June 30, 2022;
(d) the published unaudited interim financial statements as of June 30, 2022 of BASF Finance;
(e) sets of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the Debt Issuance
    Program Prospectus dated September 14, 2012, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated
    September 11, 2013, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 16, 2014, the Debt
    Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 12, 2016, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus
    dated September 11, 2017, the Supplement dated October 30, 2017, the Debt Issuance Program
    Prospectus dated September 11, 2018, the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 13,
    2019, the Debt Issuance Program dated September 10, 2020, the Supplement dated April 1, 2021 and
    the Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 10, 2021.


All of these documents are published                and    available   on    the   website      of   BASF
https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors.html.


Cross-reference list of Documents incorporated by Reference

          Section of
 Page     Prospectus    Document incorporated by reference
25        BASF          Financial Report 2021 of BASF Group
          Group,        (p. 186 – p. 285)
          Financial         Consolidated balance sheet (p. 196 – p. 197)
          Information       Consolidated statement of income (p. 194)
                            Consolidated statement of cash flows (p. 198)
                            Notes (p. 200 – p. 285)
                            Auditors' report (p. 188 – p. 193)
                        https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/news-and-
                        media/publications/reports/2022/BASF_Report_2021.pdf
                        Financial Report 2020 of BASF Group
                        (p. 212 – p. 312)
                            Consolidated balance sheet (p. 224 – p. 225)
                            Consolidated statement of income (p. 222)
                            Consolidated statement of cash flows (p. 226)
                            Notes (p. 228 – p. 312)
                            Auditors' report (p. 214 – p. 221)
                        https://report.basf.com/2020/en/servicepages/downloads/files/basf-report-2020-
                        basf-ar20.pdf
                        Interim First-Half-Results 2022 of BASF Group
                        (p. 24 – p. 49)
                            Balance Sheet (p. 26 - 27)
                            Statement of Income (p. 24)
                            Statement of Cash Flows (p. 28)
                            Notes (p. 31 – p. 47)
                        https://report.basf.com/2022/q2/en/_assets/downloads/entire-basf-hyr-22.pdf
                                                 190




         Section of
 Page    Prospectus    Document incorporated by reference
62       BASF          Financial Report 2021 of BASF Finance
         Finance,          Balance Sheet (p. 10)
         Financial         Profit & Loss Account (p. 11)
         Information       Cash Flow Statement (p. 12)
                           Notes (p. 13 – p. 26)
                           Auditors' Report (p. 29 – p. 35)
                       https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/investor-relations/creditor-
                       relations/bonds/reports-basf-finance-europe-n-
                       v/BASF_Finance_Europe_NV_Annual-Report_2021.pdf
                       Financial Report 2020 of BASF Finance
                           Balance Sheet (p. 10)
                           Profit & Loss Account (p. 11)
                           Cash Flow Statement (p. 12)
                           Notes (p. 13 – p. 26)
                           Auditors' Report (p. 29 – p. 33)
                       https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/investor-relations/creditor-
                       relations/bonds/reports-basf-finance-europe-n-
                       v/BASF_Finance_Europe_NV_Annual-Report_2020.pdf
                       Semi-Annual Report 2022 of BASF Finance
                           Balance Sheet (p. 9)
                           Profit & Loss Account (p. 10)
                           Cash Flow Statement (p. 11)
                           Notes (p. 12 – p. 24)
                       https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/investor-relations/creditor-
                       relations/bonds/reports-basf-finance-europe-n-v/BASF_Finance_Europe_NV_Semi-
                       Annual_2022.pdf
65/107   Sets of       - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
         Terms and     Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 14, 2012 (p. 75 – p. 91
         Conditions    (English language) and p. 108 – p. 126 (German language)) ("Option I A");
         of the        https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/financing-strategy/debt-
         Notes         issuance-program/base-prospectus-dip-2012.html
                       - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                       Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 11, 2013 (p. 78 – p. 95
                       (English language) and p. 112 – p. 132 (German language)) ("Option I B");
                       https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/financing-strategy/debt-
                       issuance-program/base-prospectus-dip-2013.html
                       - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                       Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 16, 2014 (p. 78 – p. 98
                       (English language) and p. 115 – p. 139 (German language)) ("Option I C");
                       https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/financing-strategy/debt-
                       issuance-program/base-prospectus-dip-2014.html
                       - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                       Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 12, 2016 (p. 79 – p. 99
                       (English language) and p. 116 – p. 140 (German language)) ("Option I D");
                       https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/financing-strategy/debt-
                       issuance-program/base-prospectus-dip-2016.html
                                                    191




          Section of
 Page     Prospectus    Document incorporated by reference
                        - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                        Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 11, 2017 (p. 79 – p. 99
                        (English language) and p. 116 – p. 140 (German language)) ("Option I E");
                        https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/financing-strategy/debt-
                        issuance-program/base-prospectus-dip-2017.html
                        - "4. Supplemental information pertaining to the section TERMS AND
                        CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES – ENGLISH LANGUAGE VERSION" (p. 9 and 10)
                        and "5. Supplemental information pertaining to the section TERMS AND
                        CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES – GERMAN LANGUAGE VERSION" (p. 10 – p. 11)
                        contained in the First Supplement dated 30 October 2017;
                        https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/investor-relations/creditor-
                        relations/financing-strategy/debt-issuance-
                        program/First_Supplement_BASF_DIP_2017.pdf
                        - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                        Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 11, 2018 (p. 85 – p. 106
                        (English language) and p. 124 – p. 148 (German language)) ("Option I F");
                        https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/financing-strategy/debt-
                        issuance-program/base-prospectus-dip-2018.html
                        - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                        Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 13, 2019 (p. 60 – p. 81
                        (English language) and p. 101 – p. 125 (German language)) ("Option I G").
                        https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/financing-strategy/debt-
                        issuance-program/base-prospectus-dip-2019.html
                        - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                        Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 10, 2020 (p. 65 – p. 86
                        (English language) and p. 106 – p. 130 (German language)) ("Option I H").
                        https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/investor-relations/creditor-
                        relations/financing-strategy/debt-issuance-
                        program/Base_Prospectus_BASF_DIP_2020.pdf
                        - "III. Replacement information pertaining to the section "TERMS AND
                        CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES (ENGLISH LANGUAGE VERSION)" (p. 14 – 15)
                        and and "IV. Replacement information pertaining to the section "TERMS AND
                        CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES (GERMAN LANGUAGE VERSION)" (p. 16 – 17)
                        contained in the First Supplement dated 1 April, 2021
                        https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/investor-relations/creditor-
                        relations/financing-strategy/debt-issuance-
                        program/First_Supplement_BASF_DIP_2020.pdf
                        - set of Terms and Conditions for Notes with fixed interest rates contained in the
                        Debt Issuance Program Prospectus dated September 10, 2021 (p. 63 – p. 86
                        (English language) and p. 107 – p. 133 (German language)) ("Option I I").
                        https://www.basf.com/global/documents/en/investor-relations/creditor-
                        relations/financing-strategy/debt-issuance-
                        program/Base_Prospectus_BASF_DIP_2021.pdf

Any information contained in the documents referred to above which is not listed in the cross-reference list
above and, therefore not incorporated by reference, is either not relevant for investors of the Notes or
covered elsewhere in the Prospectus.
All of these documents are published                  and    available   on    the   website    of   BASF
https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors.html.


Availability of Documents
Any document incorporated herein by reference can be obtained without charge at the offices of BASF
and BASF Finance as set out at the end of this Prospectus. In addition, such documents will be available
free of charge from the principal office in Luxembourg of Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A. (the
"Luxembourg Listing Agent") for Notes listed on the official list of and admitted to trading on the
                                                 192




regulated market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and is published and available on the website of
BASF https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors.html.
The Articles of Association of BASF SE are published and availabale on the                      website
https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/basf-at-a-glance/corporate-governance/statutes.html.
The Articles of Association of BASF Finance B.V. are published and availabale on the website
https://www.basf.com/global/en/investors/creditor-relations/basf-bonds/reports-basf-finance-europe-n-
v.html.
                                   193




                    NAMES AND ADDRESSES
                              THE ISSUERS

         BASF SE                                  BASF Finance Europe N.V.
     Carl-Bosch-Str. 38                                Velperplein 23
67056 Ludwigshafen am Rhein                           6811 AH Arnhem
          Germany                                     The Netherlands




                 FISCAL AGENT AND PAYING AGENT

                   Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
                           Taunusanlage 12
                        60325 Frankfurt am Main
                               Germany


                    LUXEMBOURG LISTING AGENT

                    Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A.
                      2 Boulevard Konrad Adenauer
                           1115 Luxembourg
                       Grand Duchy of Luxembourg




                          LEGAL ADVISERS

                     To the Dealers as to German law
                            Hengeler Mueller
                 Partnerschaft von Rechtsanwälten mbB
                        Bockenheimer Landstr. 24
                         60323 Frankfurt am Main
                                Germany

                      To the Issuers as to Dutch law
                          Clifford Chance LLP
                               Droogbak 1a
                          1013 GE Amsterdam
                            The Netherlands
                                               194




                                AUDITORS TO THE ISSUERS


               For BASF SE                               For BASF Finance Europe N.V.

KPMG AG Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft                  BDO Audit & Assurance B.V.
            THE SQUAIRE                                         Krijgsman 9
            Am Flughafen                                    1186 DM Amstelveen
       60549 Frankfurt am Main                                P.O. Box 71730
              Germany                                       1008 DE Amsterdam
                                                              The Netherlands




                                          DEALERS


  Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria, S.A.                     Banco Santander, S.A.
               Ciudad BBVA                                  Ciudad Grupo Santander
             C/ Sauceda, 28                                     Edificio Encinar
         Edificio Asia - 2nd Floor                           Avenida de Cantabria
              28050, Madrid                             28660, Boadilla del Monte, Madrid
                   Spain                                              Spain

        Barclays Bank Ireland PLC                                 BNP Paribas
          One Molesworth Street                             16, boulevard des Italiens
            Dublin 2, D02 RF29                                    75009 Paris
                  Ireland                                            France

        BofA Securities Europe SA                     Citigroup Global Markets Europe AG
             51 rue La Boétie                                    Reuterweg 16
               75008 Paris                                   60323 Frankfurt am Main
                  France                                            Germany

    Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft               Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank
      Kaiserstraße 16 (Kaiserplatz)                     12, Place des États-Unis, CS 70052
       60311 Frankfurt am Main                               92547 Montrouge CEDEX
                Germany                                               France

    Credit Suisse Bank (Europe), S.A.                  Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft
            Calle de Ayala, 42                             Mainzer Landstrasse 11-17
              28001 Madrid                                  60329 Frankfurt am Main
                  Spain                                            Germany

     DZ BANK AG Deutsche Zentral-                      Goldman Sachs Bank Europe SE
         Genossenschaftsbank,                                    Marienturm
           Frankfurt am Main                                 Taunusanlage 9-10
           Platz der Republik                              60329 Frankfurt am Main
        60325 Frankfurt am Main                                   Germany
                Germany

        HSBC Continental Europe                                  ING Bank N.V.
           38, avenue Kléber                                    Foppingadreef 7
              75116 Paris                                     1102 BD Amsterdam
                 France                                         The Netherlands

           Intesa Sanpaolo S.p.A.                               J.P. Morgan SE
Divisione IMI Corporate & Investment Banking               Taunustor 1 (Taunus Turm)
                Via Manzoni 4                               60310 Frankfurt am Main
                 20121 Milan                                       Germany
                     Italy
                               195




Landesbank Baden-Württemberg           Mizuho Securities Europe GmbH
      Am Hauptbahnhof 2                          Taunustor 1
        70173 Stuttgart                    60310 Frankfurt am Main
          Germany                                 Germany

  Morgan Stanley Europe SE              MUFG Securities (Europe) N.V.
   Grosse Gallusstrasse 18           World Trade Center, Tower H, 11th Floor
   60312 Frankfurt am Main                        Zuidplein 98
          Germany                             1077 XV Amsterdam
                                                The Netherlands

  MUFG Securities EMEA plc                   NatWest Markets N.V.
     Ropemaker Place                         Claude Debussylaan 94
    25 Ropemaker Street                       1082 MD Amsterdam
     London EC2Y 9AJ                            The Netherlands
      United Kingdom

     RBC Europe Limited              RBC Capital Markets (Europe) GmbH
       100 Bishopsgate                        Taunusanlage 17
      London EC2N 4AA                     60325 Frankfurt am Main
       United Kingdom                             Germany

     SMBC Bank EU AG                           Société Générale
    Neue Mainzer Str. 52-58                 29 boulevard Hausmann
       60311 Frankfurt                            75009 Paris
          Germany                                   France

   UBS AG London Branch                       UniCredit Bank AG
        5 Broadgate                             Arabellastr. 12
     London EC2M 2QS                           81925 München
      United Kingdom                              Germany
