City Research Online
City St George’s, University of London

Citation: Littlewood, B., Popov, P. T. & Strigini, L. (2001). Modeling software
design diversity. ACM Computer Surveys, 33(2), pp. 177-208. doi:
10.1145/384192.384195
This is the unspecified version of the paper.
This version of the publication may differ from the final published version. To cite
this item please consult the publisher's version.

Permanent repository link: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/1951/
Link to published version: https://doi.org/10.1145/384192.384195

Copyright and Reuse: Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or
copyright holders. Copies of full items can be used for personal research or study,
educational, or not-for-profit purposes without prior permission or charge, unless otherwise
indicated, provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic details are credited, a
hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the content is not changed
in any way. For full details of reuse please refer to City Research Online policy.
City Research Online:

http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/

publications@citystgeorges.ac.uk

Modelling software design diversity - a review
Bev Littlewood, Peter Popov, Lorenzo Strigini
Centre for Software Reliability, City University
Northampton Square, London EC1V OHB, UK
Email:{bl,ptp,strigini}@csr.city.ac.uk
Abstract
Design diversity has been used for many years now as a means of achieving a degree of fault tolerance
in software-based systems. Whilst there is clear evidence that the approach can be expected to deliver
some increase in reliability compared with a single version, there is not agreement about the extent of
this. More importantly, it remains difficult to evaluate exactly how reliable a particular diverse faulttolerant system is. This difficulty arises because assumptions of independence of failures between
different versions have been shown not to be tenable: assessment of the actual level of dependence
present is therefore needed, and this is hard. In this tutorial we survey the modelling issues here, with
an emphasis upon the impact these have upon the problem of assessing the reliability of fault tolerant
systems. The intended audience is one of designers, assessors and project managers with only a basic
knowledge of probabilities, as well as reliability experts without detailed knowledge of software, who
seek an introduction to the probabilistic issues in decisions about design diversity.
Categories and subject descriptors:
C.4 Computer Systems Organization, PERFORMANCE OF SYSTEMS, Fault tolerance
C.4 Computer Systems Organization, PERFORMANCE OF SYSTEMS, Reliability, availability, and
serviceability
D.2 Software, SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
J.7 Computer Applications, COMPUTERS IN OTHER SYSTEMS
General terms: Design, Reliability
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Software fault tolerance, safety, protection systems, control
systems, N-version software, multiple version programming, functional diversity.

1 Introduction and Background
1.1 The need for software reliability
All systems need to be sufficiently reliable.
Even for mass-market software, such as word-processors and spreadsheets, where the consequences of
individual failures are usually not catastrophic, unreliability can have serious commercial implications to vendor and
user. For safety-critical software, on the other hand, it is clearly vital that its unreliability is not greater than is needed for
its contribution to the overall safety of a system.
There are two related issues here. In the first place there is the issue of achieving the necessary reliability. Is the
target reliability feasible? What software engineering techniques are appropriate to employ in its design and building?
Secondly there is the issue of assessing the reliability that has actually been achieved, to convince ourselves that it is
'good enough'.
Clearly, the difficulty of these two tasks will depend upon the level of reliability that is required. This varies
quite markedly from one application to another, and from one industry to another. Some of the most stringent
requirements seem to apply to applications involving active control: for instance, software-based flight control systems
('fly-by-wire') in civil aircraft such as the Airbus A3XX and Boeing 777 fall under the requirement that catastrophic
failures be 'not anticipated to occur over the entire operational life of all airplanes of one type', usually translated as 10-9
probability of failure per hour [FAA 1985]. By contrast, safety systems - systems that are only called upon when some
controlled system gets into a potentially dangerous state - often have relatively modest requirements: for example, the

This work has been submitted for publication. Copyright may be transferred without further notice and the
accepted version may then be posted by the publisher.

Modelling software design diversity - a review
software-based Primary Protection System (PPS) for the Sizewell B nuclear reactor had a requirement of 10-4
probability of failure upon demand (pfd)1.
The most stringent of these requirements look extremely difficult to satisfy, but there is some evidence from
earlier systems that very high software reliability has been achieved during extensive operational use. Reliability data for
critical systems are rarely published, but, for instance, measurement-based estimates on some control/monitoring
systems give a failure rate of 4⋅10-8 per hour for potentially safety-related functions [Laryd 1994]; an analysis [Shooman
1996] of FAA records (while pointing at the extreme difficulty of obtaining trustworthy data) tentatively estimated
failure occurrence rates in avionics software to vary in the range 10-6 - 10-8 (very high reliability, but short of the 10-9
level) for systems in which failures prompted the issue of FAA 'airworthiness directives', and a much lower bound for
systems for which no such failures were reported. However, such after-the-event assessment of reliability is not the same
as an assurance prior to deployment that a very high reliability has been achieved.

1.2 Modelling single-version software reliability
1.2.1 The software failure process
Before discussing the use of multi-version software in a fault-tolerant system, it is instructive to look briefly at
the nature of the software failure process, and answer some of the common questions that are asked: Why does software
fail? What are the mechanisms that underlie the software failure process? If software failures are 'systematic', why do we
still talk of reliability, using probability models?
We begin with the last of these, examining what is meant by the terms random failure for hardware and
systematic failure for software. These do seem somewhat misleading, inasmuch as they appear to suggest that in the one
case a probabilistic approach is inevitable, but that in the other we might be able to get away with completely
deterministic arguments. In fact this is not the case, and probabilistic arguments seem inevitable in both cases.
When we use the word systematic here, it refers to the fault mechanism, i.e. the mechanism whereby a fault
reveals itself as a failure, and not to the failure process. Thus it is correct to say that if a fault of this class has shown
itself in certain circumstances, then it can be guaranteed to show itself whenever these circumstances are exactly
reproduced. In the terminology of software, which is usually considered the most important source of systematic
failures, we would say that if a program failed once on a particular input case it would always fail on that input case until
the offending fault had been successfully removed. In this sense there is determinism, and it is from this determinism
that we obtain the terminology2.
However, our interest really centres upon the failure process: what we see when the system under study is used
in its operational environment. In a real-time system, for example, we would have a well-defined time variable (not
necessarily real clock time) and our interest would centre upon the process of failures embedded in time. In this case we
might wish to assure ourselves that the rate of occurrence of failures was sufficiently small, or that there was a
sufficiently high probability of surviving some pre-assigned mission time. In a safety system, such as a reactor
protection system, which is only required to respond to occasional demands from a wider system, we would be
interested in the process of failed demands within the sequence of all demands. We might express our reliability
requirement as a probability of failure upon demand (pfd). The important point is that the failure processes are not
deterministic for either 'systematic' faults or for random faults, as we shall show.
We shall use the terminology of software here, for convenience, but it should be remembered that systematic
failures also include those arising from certain design and construction faults in hardware. Indeed, the very success of
the conventional physical hardware reliability theory is now revealing the importance of design faults to the overall
reliability of complex systems even when these do not contain software. Our success in devising intelligent strategies to
minimise the effects of physical failure of components results in a higher proportion of even 'hardware' failures being
caused by flawed designs. Software, on the other hand, has no significant physical manifestation: its failures are always
the result of inherent design faults revealing themselves under appropriate operational circumstances3. These faults will

1

A sensitivity study of the probabilistic risk assessment of the Sizewell B reactor later showed that a 10-3 pfd would
still produce a tolerable risk and it is this latter figure that the UK Nuclear Installations Inspectorate has accepted.

2

In practice, even design-caused failures may not occur in an obviously deterministic way. In software, it often
happens that failures are difficult to reproduce because they depend on specific, difficult to observe conditions, like
activities of other programs in the same computer. In hardware, some design faults will just make the system
exceedingly vulnerable to some stressful condition (e.g., corrosion or electromagnetic interference). This fact only
reinforces the need for a probabilistic approach to design faults.

3

'Design', in this context, means the whole process which produces the executable software: 'design', or 'software',
faults, are all defects in the executable software, caused for example by errors in defining the specifications for the
software, by coding errors, by errors in compilation due to compiler defects, by configuration errors, like using the
2

Modelling software design diversity - a review
have been resident in the software since their creation in the original design or in subsequent changes.
The software failure process, then, is a process in which faults are encountered as a result of execution on a
succession of input readings. Consider, as an example, a nuclear plant's safety protection system, which must respond to
the demands made upon it by a wider system (the physical reactor and its control system). The totality of all possible
demands, the demand space, D (see Figure 1), is likely to be extremely large. Each point in this many-dimensional space
can be thought of as completely characterising a particular physical demand. This could be a vector of temperatures,
pressures, flow rates, etc, sampled at regular intervals by sensor scans (the period of time required to define a 'demand'
will influence the dimension of the vector).

D

O
P
DF

unacceptable

acceptable

Figure 1. Conceptual model of the software failure process. Program execution is a mapping from the
set D, of all possible demands (sequences of input values), into the set of output sequences, O. DF
represents the totality of all demands that the program, P, cannot execute correctly: they map into
unacceptable output sequences.
Note that the notion of 'trajectory' is, in this example, incorporated into the definition of 'demand', so that a
single point in the demand space describes the way in which a demand occurs and progresses through time. This allows
us to regard a single point in the demand space as completely representing a particular demand, albeit at the price of
making the space itself extremely complex. Readers should note that this model is only intended to be used at a
conceptual level - it is unlikely that it would be possible to give a complete and detailed description of a demand space
for most applications, but this is not needed for our purposes here.4 In section 5.3 we discuss the difficulty in modelling
the demands as explicit sequences of inputs.
When the software executes, demands are selected from the demand space and there is usually inherent
uncertainty about this selection mechanism: we cannot predict with certainty what all future demands will be. This
uncertainty can be represented, formally at least, by a probability distribution5 over the space of all possible demands:
we call this the demand profile. In the case of the protection system it might be reasonable to believe that the successive
demands are selected independently according to this distribution, since successive demands are likely to be months
apart and thus there is little chance of there being 'memory' of a previous demand.
Some of the demands in the demand space are ones that the program can execute correctly, some are ones it
cannot execute correctly: when one of the latter is encountered, we say that the software failed. We call the set of all
failure-causing demands the failure set, DF. How we decide whether or not the result of a program execution is a failure
is clearly not a trivial exercise, but is beyond the scope of the present discussion - typically it requires a specification of
intended behaviour that is sufficiently complete that a decision on acceptability of output can be made for all possible
demands.
Since, as we have seen, there is uncertainty as to which demand will be selected on a particular occasion, there
is also clearly uncertainty as to whether this demand will lie in DF or not. That is, there is uncertainty as to whether there
will be a failure or not. In other words, the process of failures of a program is an uncertain one - it is a stochastic process.
wrong release of some software modules. The definition excludes defects in the stored image of the software caused
by physical causes, like memory errors or communication noise.
4

In the previous literature, the 'demand space' as defined here is usually called the 'input space'. This has turned out to
be confusing as the term 'input' is also commonly used for individual 'input variables' to a program or system. The set
of values of the variables read in one sampling step, which is itself a multidimensional vector, does not by itself
determine whether the software will produce a correct result or a failure, because the software's behaviour is also
determined by the values stored in its internal variables, which depend on the sequence of the previous input readings.

5

Once again, it is unlikely in practice that this would be known in detail, but this is not needed for the conceptual
model here to be useful.
3

Modelling software design diversity - a review
It follows that all statements concerning reliability must take account of this inherent uncertainty: in other words,
systematic failures are just as 'random' as (conventionally defined) random failures. If, in the protection system example,
we knew all the failure-prone demands that comprise DF, and the probability associated with each such demand, the
probability of failure upon demand could be predicted - it would be the sum of these probabilities. This is rarely a
practical way of predicting reliability, of course, since information of this extensiveness is unlikely to be available.
The reader will have seen that this discussion in terms of the demand space, D, and failure set, DF, does not
allow us to talk about particular faults. One way to think of a fault in this model is to ask what happens when a failure
occurs, and the fault that caused the failure is removed by a (successful) change to the program. Clearly, this means that
the offending demand can now be executed correctly by the program, and would not cause failure if it were selected
again. In most cases it will not be the only demand so affected, and many points that were in DF will now be executed
correctly. In other words, DF will have decreased in size. We can think of the sub-set of points in DF that have changed
from failure points to non-failure points (success points) to be 'the fault' that was removed. In the case of the protection
system, the improvement in the pfd resulting from the fault's removal would simply be the probability of selecting a
demand from this sub-set - the sum of the probabilities from the demand profile over this sub-set.
This interpretation of fault as a sub-set of DF is not, of course, a semantic one. We cannot use our knowledge of
it to say anything about the nature of the mistake that a human designer made, that has become embedded in the
program. Conversely, it is also usually difficult, if not impossible, to use such semantic information, when it is available,
to say anything useful in terms of the interpretation above. In particular, it is usually difficult to know what impact upon
reliability there will be if we remove a particular fault, even when we have considerable information about its nature.6
1.2.2 Evaluation of software reliability from failure data
The purpose of the previous section was to show that the software failure process is indeed a random one, as is
the case for failures in conventional hardware reliability studies. The underlying sources of the uncertainty in the two
cases are, however, completely different.
Clearly, the conceptual model of the previous section is not very helpful when we need to estimate and predict
the reliability of a particular program based upon observation of its actual failure data. Instead, research over the years
has concentrated on building a statistical theory based upon the model.
The techniques for predicting future reliability from observed behaviour can be divided into two categories,
dealing with two different forms of the prediction problem7:

•

steady-state reliability estimation, considering the results of testing the version of the software that is to be
deployed for operational use ('as delivered'); the theory underlying this prediction is much the same as used in
predicting the reliability of physical objects from sample testing;

•

reliability growth- based prediction (often called 'reliability growth modelling'), considering the series of
successive versions of the software that are created, tested, and corrected after tests discover faults, leading to
the final version of the software that is to be evaluated. The data used in this case are the results (series of
successful and of failed tests) of testing each successive version. Having observed a trend of (usually)
increasing reliability, we can extrapolate this trend to predict current reliability and how it will change in the
future.

Steady-state evaluation is the more straightforward procedure, and requires fewer assumptions. The behaviour
of the system in the past is seen as a sample from the space of its possible behaviours. The aspect of interest of this
behaviour, i.e., the occurrence of failures, is governed by parameters (typically, a failure rate or a probability of failure
per demand) that can be estimated via standard inference techniques. Many projects, however, budget for little or no
realistic testing of a completed design before its deployment, or in any case set reliability requirements higher than their
budgeted amount of testing can confirm with the required confidence. Reliability growth-based prediction is then an
appealing alternative, because it allows the assessor to use the evidence accumulated while the product was 'debugged'
rather than just evidence about its final version. However, any prediction depends on trusting that the trend will
continue. In a macroscopic sense, this requires that no qualitative change in the debugging process interrupt the trend
(e.g., a change of the debugging team, or the integration of new functionalities could bring about such a change). In a
short-term sense, it requires trust that the very last fix to the software was not an 'unlucky' one, which decreased
reliability.
In both cases, the success of prediction depends upon the observed failure process being similar to that which it
6 There are exceptions to this. If, for example, the fault takes the form of a particular function of the software simply
not working, and we know how frequently the function is called upon in operational use, then this frequency tells us
the increase in reliability that will result from removing the fault.
7

A more complete introduction to the various reliability prediction methods, and the inference techniques they use, is
in [Littlewood & Strigini 1998].
4

Modelling software design diversity - a review
is desired to predict: the techniques are essentially sophisticated forms of extrapolation. In particular, if we wish to
predict the operational reliability of a program from failure data obtained during testing, it is necessary that the test case
selection mechanism produces cases representative (statistically) of those that present themselves during operational use.
This is not always easy, but there is a good understanding of appropriate techniques, as well as some experience of it
being carried out in realistic industrial conditions, with the test-based predictions being validated by observation of later
operational use [Littlewood & Strigini 1998], [Dyer 1992], [Musa 1993].
It is also worth emphasising that, although we often speak loosely of the reliability of a software product, in fact
we really mean the reliability of the product working in a particular environment, since the perceived reliability might
vary considerably from one user or installation to another. It is not currently possible to test a program in one
environment (i.e., with a given selection of test cases) and use the reliability growth modelling techniques to predict how
reliable it will be in another. Essentially the problem will be to ensure that the testing environment is statistically
identical (i.e. in the manner in which demands are selected) to the operational one.
By far the most extensive - and successful - work on software reliability assessment concerns 'reliability growth
modelling'. There is now an extensive body of literature together with some considerable experience of these techniques
in industrial practice [Lyu 1996], and it is now often possible to obtain good predictions of the operational reliability of a
program. These techniques might be first candidates for evaluating the reliability of a critical system, except for two
obstacles. The first obstacle is the aforementioned assumption that an observed statistical trend to increased reliability
continues through the last fix. The other problem is more general: obtaining assurance that a software product satisfies
its reliability requirements via statistical techniques is only feasible, in practice, when the requirements are fairly modest.
The reason is the law of diminishing returns in reliability growth.
Reliability growth models in their simplest form assume that when a failure occurs there is an attempt to
identify and remove the design fault which caused the failure, whereupon the software is set running again, eventually to
fail once again. The successive times of failure-free working are the input to statistical models, which use this data to
estimate the current reliability of the program under study, and to predict how the reliability will change in the future.
Figure 2 shows an analysis of failure data from a system in operational use, for which software and hardware
design changes were being introduced as a result of the failures. Here the current rate of occurrence of failures (ROCOF)
is estimated at various times. The dotted line is fitted manually to give a visual impression of what seems to be a very
clear law of diminishing returns. The level of reliability reached here is quite modest: about 10-2 failures per hour of
operational use. More importantly, it is by no means obvious how the details of the future reliability growth of this
system will look. For example, it is not clear to what the curve is asymptotic: will it eventually approach zero, or is there
an irreducible level of residual unreliability reached when the effects of correct fault removal are balanced by those of
new fault insertion? And what may this level be? Assuming for instance a requirement of a failure rate lower than 0.005
- the horizontal line in the figure - should one expect the curve shown to drop towards an asymptote that is below this
level, or above it?
Rate of occurrence of failures
(hour-1)
0.03

0.02

0.01

0.005

4000

8000

12000

16000

Elapsed time (hours)

Figure 2 Estimates of the rate of occurrence of failures for a system experiencing failures in operation due to
software faults and hardware design faults. Here the points indicate recalculations of the estimate, performed
periodically; there are many failures between any two successive points. The broken line here is fitted by eye.
This empirical evidence of a law of diminishing returns for debugging software seems to be supported by most
of the available evidence. There are convincing intuitive reasons for results of this kind.
5

Modelling software design diversity - a review
A program starts life with a finite number of faults, and these are encountered randomly during operation.
Different faults contribute differently to the overall unreliability of the program: some are 'larger' than others. 'Large'
here means that the rate at which the fault would show itself (i.e. if we were not to remove it the first time we saw it) is
large: different faults have different rates of occurrence. Adams [Adams 1984] shows a particularly dramatic example of
this based on a large database of problem reports for some large IBM systems [Adams 1984]. The smallest faults he
discovered each occurred only about once every 5000 years. They accounted for 1/3 of uncovered faults.
During reliability growth we assume that a fix is carried out at each failure. Let us assume for simplicity that
each fix attempt is successful. As debugging progresses, there will be a tendency for a fault with a larger rate to show
itself before a fault with a smaller rate: more precisely, for any time t, the probability that fault A reveals itself during
time t will be smaller than the probability that B reveals itself during t, if the rate of A is smaller than the rate of B.
Informally, 'large' faults get removed earlier than 'small' ones. It follows that the improvements in the reliability of the
program due to earlier fixes, corresponding to faults which are likely to be larger, are greater than those due to later
fixes8.
Thus the law of diminishing returns shown in these examples is a result of two effects which reinforce one
another. As debugging progresses and the program becomes more reliable, it becomes harder to find faults (because the
rate at which the program is failing is becoming smaller), and the improvements to the reliability resulting from these
fault-removals are also becoming smaller and smaller.
In the discussion above, there has been an important implicit assumption that it is possible to fix a fault when it
has been revealed during the test, and to know that the fix is successful. In fact, there has been no serious attempt to
model the fault-fixing operation and most reliability growth models simply assume that fixes are perfect, or average out
any short-term reversals to give the longer term trend.
The difficulty here is that the potential increase in unreliability due to a bad fix is unbounded. Even to have
high confidence that the reliability was as high as it was immediately prior to the last failure, it would be necessary to
have high confidence that no new fault had been introduced. There seem to be no good grounds to have such high
confidence associated with a particular fix other than to exercise the software for a long time and never see a failure
arise from the fix.
The conservative way forward in this case is to treat the program following a fix as if it were a new program,
and thus take into account only the period of failure-free working that has been experienced since the last fix. This recasts the problem in terms of steady-state reliability assessment. Not surprisingly, the claims that can be made for the
reliability of a system that has worked without failure are fairly modest for feasible periods of observation. Intuitively,
observing a system to operate without failure over a short period of time would not give much confidence in correct
operation over a much longer period. Using a rigorous inference procedure gives results like: for a demand-based system
such as a protection system, if we require to have 99% confidence that the pfd is no worse than 10-3, we must see about
4600 failure-free demands; for 99% confidence in 10-4, the number increases to 46000 failure-free demands. Such a test
was completed for the Sizewell PPS (mentioned in Section 1.1). In the case of a continuously operating system, such as
a control system, a 99% confidence in an MTTF of 104 hours (1.14 years) would require approximately 46,000 hours of
failure-free testing; to raise the confidence bound on the MTTF to 105 hours, the testing duration must also increase to
approximately 460,000 hours. In summary, high confidence in long failure-free operation in the future requires
observing much longer failure-free operation under test. If this amount of test effort is not feasible, only much lower
confidence can be obtained. Even if we have other sources of confidence in the software, we still find that observing
correct behaviour over a short period of time adds very little to any confidence we may have in reliability over long
future periods [Littlewood & Strigini 1993].

2 Why design diversity?
2.1. Motivation and Principles
In the light of the rather strict limitations to the levels of software reliability that can be claimed from
observation of operational behaviour of a single version program, fault tolerance via design diversity has been suggested
as a way forward both for achieving higher levels of reliability, and for assisting in its assessment.
The intuitive rationale behind the use of design diversity is simply the age-old human belief that 'two heads are
better than one'. For example, we are more likely to trust our answer to some complex arithmetic calculation if a
colleague has arrived independently at the same answer. In this regard, Charles Babbage was probably the first person to
advocate using two computers - although by computer he meant a person [Babbage 1974].

8

It will now be clear that the assumption of successful fixes is not essential for this argument. Even if some fixes are
partially or totally ineffective, the reliability improvement due to a fix can be at most equal to the rate of
manifestation of the fault that is fixed, and this tends to decrease from earlier to later fixes.
6

Modelling software design diversity - a review
People building hardware systems have known for a very long time that the reliability of a system can be
increased if redundancy can be built in to its design. Thus, when a component fails, if there is another component
waiting to take over its task, the failure can be masked. Indeed, if we were able to claim that components failed
independently of one another, we might claim to make arbitrarily reliable systems from arbitrarily unreliable
components. In practice, though, such statements are largely mathematical curiosities, since complete independence
rarely, if ever, occurs in practice (and complex redundant structures bring their own, novel, forms of unreliability). We
shall see later that it is this issue of dependence of failures that makes modelling of software fault tolerance particularly
difficult.
Of course, simply replicating a component (hardware or software) with one or more identical copies of itself
will provide no guarantee against the effect of design faults, since these will themselves simply be replicated. If all
copies are exposed to the same demands, whenever a demand triggers a design fault all versions will fail together. The
natural defence against design faults in a component is thus to add different code, which may not be subject to the same
faults 9.
In its simplest form, design diversity involves the 'independent'10 creation of two or more versions of a
program, which are all executed on each input reading so that an adjudication mechanism can produce a 'best' single
output. Here the versions may be developed from the same specification, or the higher level (and usually more informal)
engineering requirements may be used to produce diverse formal specifications. Typically, the teams building the
versions work 'independently' of one another, without means of direct communication (indirect communication may still
occur: for example one team may discover faults in the common specification, causing the project managers to issue a
correction to all teams). The teams may be allowed complete freedom of choice in the methods and tools used, or they
may have these imposed upon them in order to 'force' diversity (e.g. different programming languages). In the former
case, the hope is that identical mistakes will be avoided by the natural, 'random' variation between people and their
circumstances; in the latter, the same purpose is pursued by intentionally varying the circumstances and constraints
under which the people work to solve the given problem.
Of course, this is a somewhat simplistic view of diversity, and not all systems that use design diversity do so at
this high level. Diversity can be used at lower levels in the system architecture, for example to provide protection against
failures of particularly important functions, and in a variety of forms. Designers may choose to 'adjudge' a correct result
by some form of comparison or voting, or by using self-checks or acceptance tests to detect and exclude incorrect results
[Di Giandomenico & Strigini 1990], [Blough & Sullivan 1990]. A correct state of an executing software version can be
recovered after failures by forward recovery (by adjudicating between the alternative values available) or by roll-back
and retry; diverse software versions may be allocated to processors, and scheduled to execute, according to various
alternative schemes, adapted to the kind of hardware redundancy present. The hardware processors themselves will often
be diverse, for protection against the design faults in the processors, which are known to be common. And so on [Lyu
1995], [Voges 1988], [Laprie et al. 1990]. Widely known, simple fault-tolerant schemes are: pure N-version software,
with multiple versions produced as we outlined above, and executed on the redundant processors of an N-modular
redundant system; recovery blocks, in which one version is executed at a time, its failures are detected by an acceptance
test and recovered via roll-back and retry with a different version of the software; and N-self checking software, in
which, for instance, version pairs are used as self-checking components, which self-exclude when a discrepancy between
the pair is detected: for instance, two such pairs form a redundant system able to tolerate the failure of anyone of the four
versions. More generally, some form of diversity is used against design faults in most well-built software, in the form of
defensive programming, exception handling and so on. These defences are often dispersed throughout the code of a
program, but they may also form a clearly separate subsystem, which monitors the behaviour of the main software, for
instance to guarantee that the commands to a controlled system remain within an assigned safe 'envelope' of operation

9

An alternative, partial defence is to introduce differences between the demands to identical copies of the component
('data diversity'): implicitly, via loosely coupled execution of the software copies and sampling of their sensor inputs,
or explicitly, by seeding small differences between the inputs to the components. Loosely-coupled replication is
widely adopted, even without explicit consideration for design faults. In records of operation of Tandem fault-tolerant
systems (with two copies of the software running on loosely-coupled computers), for instance, it tolerated [Lee &
Iyer 1995] 82% of the software-caused failures: many software failures only happen in specific states of the operating
system and application processes, which do not occur identically on the two machines. For intentionally-seeded
discrepancies between inputs, Ammann and Knight experimented [Ammann & Knight 1988] with the software
versions used in the Knight-Leveson experiment: they found that, on a failure-causing demand, retry with a slightly
different demand would only cause a failure with a probability that varied, for different faults, from 0 to 99%. On the
same principle, it has been shown that unreliable software may be made more reliable by frequent restarts ('software
rejuvenation' [Huang et al. 1995]) which reset state variables of the system, purging them of erroneous values or other
unusual, untested-for conditions they may have reached.

10 We use quotes here, and later in this paragraph, because of the profligate way in which words such as 'independence'

and 'independent' are used in writing about diversity and fault tolerance. Strictly, the only use of the terms which has a
formal definition concerns statistical independence, for example here between the failure processes of two or more
versions. We shall not persist in this use of quotes in the rest of the paper, because of their stylistic inelegance, but we
hope that the different meanings will be evident from the context.
7

Modelling software design diversity - a review
[Kantz & Koza 1995]. These methods are different from the writing of multiple, diverse versions of the software, but the
main question about their effectiveness is the same: how likely is it for the defensive code to fail in coincidence with the
failures against which it is intended to be a defence?
For simplicity of exposition in this paper we shall generally restrict ourselves to the simple case of multiple(usually 2-) version software, since our main concern is with issues of assessment of reliability, rather than architectural
issues.
Figure 3 shows the way in which it is generally believed, in an informal way, that design diversity works. At
the top level there is 'process diversity', i.e. diversity in the design practices, in the personnel, etc., involved in the
production of the versions. This diversity - people doing things differently - results in the versions themselves being
'different' from one another, and in particular, it is hoped, it is unlikely that faults in one version will be identical to
those in another. These differences between versions in turn affect the chance that, if one version fails on a particular
demand, another version will also fail: it is this diversity of failure behaviour that is the goal we seek. We would like
statistical independence between the version failure processes or, even better, a negative dependence, so that the
situations in which one version is especially likely to fail will be ones in which the other is especially unlikely to fail.

Process
'diversity'

Product
'diversity'

'Diversity' of
product failure
behaviour
Figure 3 Different types of 'diversity' at different stages of the software design and development
process
Claims for the reliability of a software-based system that utilises design diversity - perhaps forming part of the
safety case of a wider system - will involve evidence from all three stages shown in Figure 3, and might feed into a
safety case argument. Positive evidence from each of these stages would tend to make us be more confident in the
system but we would clearly need to qualify and quantify this higher confidence on the basis of the strength of the
evidence and the stage it concerns.

2.2 Acceptance
We turn now briefly to the degree of industrial adoption of diversity. The very success of techniques using
redundancy to protect against hardware failures has resulted in a greater proportion of failures being due to design
defects. At the same time, in most industries there has been an increase in system complexity as designers take
advantage of the extensive functionality that can be provided by software, so the risk of human errors resulting in design
faults has increased. Last, software-based systems are being given increasingly critical tasks, for instance with softwarebased safety protection systems substituting hardwired ones. Design diversity was thus adopted in some industrial
sectors (aerospace and rail transportation) as software was beginning to be used for safety-critical functions. Examples
include the Airbus A320/30/40 aircraft [Traverse 1988], [Briere & Traverse 1993] various railway signalling and control
systems [Hagelin 1988], [Mongardi 1993], [Turner et al. 1987], [Kantz & Koza 1995], [Lindeberg 1993]. The adoption
of diversity has been limited, though, by doubts about its costs and about its effectiveness, which we will discuss in the
next section.
Software diversity is also present as a side-effect in many systems using 'functional diversity', the widespread
system design approach whereby critical system functions are provided by multiple subsystems that differ as much as
possible in their principles of action, inputs and implementation technology: for instance, giving an aircraft different
instruments, based on different physical principles, for estimating speed or altitude.
As for software design diversity without differentiation of functions, the attitudes of industry and regulators
vary, between industrial sectors but also within the same sector. The accepted guidelines for the civil aviation industry,
[RTCA/EuroCAE 1992] do not prescribe software diversity; they allow a company to claim diversity as one alternative
to some other, standard assurance practices, but require the company to demonstrate the specific benefits claimed from
its use of diversity. Other standards (e.g. [MoD 1997] , [MoD 1996]) also consider diversity, but generally with the same
attitude of leaving to the developer the burden of demonstrating its advantage. As we said, the Airbus A320/330/340

8

Modelling software design diversity - a review
families of aircraft use software diversity (although their airworthiness certification did not rely on this: diversity was
just an additional factor to increase confidence in aircraft that depended on software as no other civil aircraft before).
Boeing, on the other hand, decided against software diversity for its own 777 aircraft, on the grounds [Yeh 1998] that it
would require restrictions to communication between software and system engineers, which in turn is an important
defence against requirement errors. Boeing (like Airbus) did instead use hardware diversity among the redundant
processors.

3 Does design diversity work?
Evidence concerning the effectiveness of design diversity falls into three main types:
•

Operational experience of its application in real industrial systems;

•

Controlled experimental studies;

•

Mathematical models of the failure processes of diverse versions.

Many industrial and research experiences are reported in [Voges 1988, Lyu 1995], but relatively little data have
been published. On the positive side, several safety-critical systems have been implemented using software fault
tolerance based on design diversity, and there have been no reports of catastrophic failure attributable to software design
faults.
It seems reasonable to believe that diversity contributed to reliability and safety in these applications, although
the evidence is insufficient to decide how much it helped. Disagreements between versions have indeed happened. A
disagreement may mean that one of the versions was in error due to a design fault, and thus diversity actually acted to
prevent a possible system failure. These 'vote-outs' in themselves do not necessarily indicate a successfully tolerated
design-caused failure: they might also be the effect of transient hardware faults (which could be tolerated by simple
redundancy without the extra cost of diversity) or even occasional spurious disagreements between correct versions. The
manufacturers have reported that some software faults were found, but they were of a non-threatening nature. So, the
evidence from operation of these systems is a weak indication of usefulness. However, even if these specific systems had
been free of design faults, this would not make the decision to apply diversity an unreasonable one: software
development processes produce very variable results, and diversity would act as insurance against the risk of a single
version system being an unusually unreliable product.
On the other hand, there are insufficient data, at least in the public domain, to be able to say whether the use of
design diversity in these examples resulted in more reliable systems than could have been achieved for the same effort
by other means. The outstanding issue are :
-

for applications with extreme reliability requirements (as in railway and avionics systems), can diversity, added
to 'complete' exploitation of the other techniques available, improve the reliability that can be achieved, albeit at
added cost? The a priori answer seems to be 'yes', provided that the added architectural complexity does not
offset the gain due to diversity; but strong a posteriori evidence would be very difficult to obtain, as even single
versions would be very reliable.

-

otherwise, the question becomes one of cost-effectiveness: to what extent (or in what circumstances) is design
diversity a more effective way of achieving a particular level of reliability in a software-based system?

The costs of diversity have several components. Of course each software version must be developed and
verified. Activities like coding are fully replicated for each version produced, multiplying costs accordingly. Other costs
may increase, but not linearly with the number of versions. E.g., the possibility of testing the multiple versions 'back-toback' may reduce the cost of verification (compared to verifying N versions separately). Requirements need to be
specified only once, but the need to avoid ambiguities leading to discrepancies between the versions may make the
requirement phase more expensive (though possibly higher-quality) than for a single version. A redundant architecture is
clearly more complex to design than a non-redundant one, and even for a system that would employ hardware
redundancy in any case, diversity requires additional attention in designing, for instance, the adjudication functions.
Last, the development of multiple versions has greater organisational costs than that of one version, in terms of coordination effort, cost of delays and so on. The cost of diversity has been discussed e.g. in [Migneault 1982], [Laprie et
al. 1990], [Voges 1994].
Some information on this cost-effectiveness issue - albeit incomplete - comes from experiments that have been
conducted under controlled conditions. In [Anderson et al. 1985] it is reported that a 2-version recovery block system
masked about 70% of the failures that would have taken place in the single channel of the primary version. That is, the
2-version system is less than half as unreliable as the single version. We might be tempted to assume that a 2-version
system costs twice as much to develop as a single version, and conclude that there is a modest advantage to be gained
from the use of diversity. This could be misleading, though, since the cost of improving the reliability of a single version
may not increase linearly: we have seen earlier, for example, that for testing, at least, there is a severe law of diminishing
returns. So, given that a two-version system achieves a given reliability, it may be the case that producing a single
version to achieve the same reliability by itself would cost more than the two-version system. Besides, in some

9

Modelling software design diversity - a review
applications (including the one in this experiment) the second version need not be as complete in its functionality as the
first one. These observations support the view that design diversity is effective.
In the above experiment there were only two versions because the system was built to commercial standards,
using expensive industrial designers and programmers. Similar constraints apply to several experiments in the nuclear
field [Voges & Gmeiner 1979], [Bishop 1988], [Bishop & Pullen 1988], [Smith et al. 1991], [Kersken & Saglietti 1992].
Other experiments have developed sufficient numbers of versions to permit statistical analysis, but often at the price of
using students as programmers, and involving 'toy' programs.
Several experiments were conducted in the US during the 1980s under NASA sponsorship. One of the bestknown of these was carried out by John Knight and Nancy Leveson at the Universities of Virginia and California,
respectively [Knight & Leveson 1986]. The original intention of the authors was to carry out a statistical test of the
hypothesis that 'independently' developed versions failed independently. The experimental results allowed the authors to
reject this hypothesis resoundingly: there was overwhelming evidence that simultaneous version failures were more
likely than would be the case if they were failing independently. This negative result, and similar results from later
experiments, has often been cited as a reason for not using design diversity for software-based systems, particularly in
the US.
In fact, this negative result is only part of the story: whilst rejecting the hypothesis of independence, the authors
also investigated whether there were nevertheless reliability benefits from the software diversity. The experiment
involved developing 27 versions and subjecting them to 1,000,000 test cases against an oracle version that was presumed
correct. On each test case, a vector of 27 dimensions recorded the result - correct or incorrect - of each version. The
authors were thus able to calculate the hypothetical reliabilities of fault tolerant architectures comprising different
versions. For example, they examined all 2-out-of-3 systems that could be constructed, and found that the average
reliability among these was an order of magnitude better than the average reliability of the 27 single versions.
This is, again, quite a positive result, but a word of warning is appropriate. The results relate to averages: there
was great variation between individual version reliabilities, and between the reliabilities of 2-out-of-3 systems. In fact
some of the 2-out-of-3 systems were considerably less reliable than some of the single versions. Thus even if we could
be sure that this result would be reproduced on different, more realistic, problems, it would not allow us to make strong
claims for the reliability of a particular 2-out-of-3 system. This difference between what we might expect on average,
and what we achieve in a particular instance, will turn out to be a key problem when we come to look at the detailed
mathematical models of diversity. In practice, of course - particularly for safety-critical systems - we want to make
trustworthy claims for a particular system.
All controlled experiments we are aware of produced similar results: multiple-version systems were, on
average, more reliable than individual versions, and sometimes much more so. Such experiments cannot tell how much
diversity would improve reliability in a new industrial project, whether this improvement could be achieved by other
means, and which methods would be more cost-effective. However, costs are directly observable after each
development. The first issue confronting developers and regulators is how much of a reliability gain can be expected
from diversity, which is the issue we will examine in the following sections.

4 Probability models for conceptual understanding of software diversity
In this section we outline the two probabilistic models developed in the 1980s which started explaining the
observation of positive correlation between failures of diverse versions. Mathematical details for both can be found in
[Littlewood & Miller 1989].
One explanation for the fact that people tend to make similar mistakes in certain circumstances is that some
problems are intrinsically harder than others - i.e. that there may be some parts of a programming task that most people
will find difficult. This intuition is at the heart of the first probability model that attempts to capture the nature of failure
dependency [Eckhardt & Lee 1985]. This elegant and influential model is based on a notion of 'variation of difficulty'
over the demand space: it is shown that the greater this variation, the greater the dependence in failure behaviour
between versions (and thus the less benefit in a fault-tolerant system). In particular, it is shown that even versions that
are truly independently developed (and there is a precise meaning given to this in the model) will fail dependently.
Most of the theoretical results which we will describe refer to the simplest form of diverse-redundant
architecture: a two-version system, with perfect adjudication ('1-out-of-2', diverse system). This very simple scheme is
actually representative of important practical applications, like a plant protection system, in which two versions run on
completely separate and non-communicating hardware channels (sensors, computers and actuators), and either version is
able to order a shut-down action no matter what the other does. This is depicted in Figure 4. For this system, we will
study the probability of the event that both versions fail on the same demand. This is the basic problem in predicting the
reliability of any diverse-redundant system. More complex systems may add details to the modelling problem
(probabilities of common failure of subsets of the versions, probability that although two versions fail they produce
different outputs so that the failure may be detected), but none can be usefully addressed without addressing this basic
problem first.

10

Modelling software design diversity - a review
Protection system

Channel 1
Channel 2

Parallel
(OR,
1-out-of-2)
actuators
for shut-down

Sensed
plant state
variables

Plant

Fig. 4 Dual-channel protection system: stylised view.

4.1 The Eckhardt and Lee (EL) model
There are two basic sources of uncertainty - randomness - in the EL model. Firstly there is the random selection
of demands from the space of all demands. This selection is controlled by a probability distribution over the demand
space, which can be thought of as characterising the demand profile.
Secondly, there is uncertainty associated with the creation of a program. The idea here is that there is a
population of all programs that could ever be written, and the act of writing a program to solve a particular problem is a
selection from this population via a probability distribution that characterises the problem. This is an unusual idea but, as
we shall see, allows a quite intuitive development of the model. Clearly, we would never know this distribution in
reality; nor would we be able to describe the space of all programs. Some programs would have a zero chance of
selection (e.g. completely inappropriate ones that do not address the problem); some programs would have a positive
chance of selection (including, it is to be expected, 'correct' ones, as well as programs that address the right functionality
but contain faults).The key variable in the model is then the difficulty function, θ (x) , defined to be the probability that a
program chosen at random will fail on a particular demand, x. Here the program is chosen via the probability distribution
over all programs, above. That is, if we were to select very many programs independently in this way, θ (x) would be
the proportion of these that failed when presented with demand x. This seems a natural definition of the intuitive notion
of 'difficulty': the more difficult a demand, the greater we would believe the chance that an unknown program will fail.
The important point here is that difficulty varies across the demand space. For a randomly selected demand,
then, the difficulty is a random variable. The unreliability of a randomly selected program is then simply

P( randomly selected program fails on randomly selected input ) = E X (θ ( X ))

(4.1)

where we use the upper case X to indicate that this is a random variable. E X ( A) denotes the expected value of the
random variable A.
Consider now the 'independent development' of two programs, π1, π2; in EL this is the independent random
selection of π1, π2. It is easy to show that for any given x these two (randomly chosen) programs fail independently:

P(π1 , π 2 both fail| input is x ) = P(π1 fails| input is x ) P(π 2 fails| input is x )
= [θ ( x )]

(4.2)

2

or

P(π 2 fails on x|π1 fails on x ) = P(π 2 fails on x ) = θ ( x )

(4.3)

where the '|' symbol means 'conditional on'.
There is thus conditional independence in their failure behaviour: they are independent for any given x ((4.2)
and (4.3) are true for all x). The important achievement of EL is to show that even in the event the versions are
‘developed independently’ so that there is this conditional independence, the versions will nevertheless fail dependently
in the important case of a randomly selected (unknown) demand. This can be seen as follows. Consider the probability
that a randomly selected pair of programs both fail on a randomly selected demand, denoted by X; this probability is
11

Modelling software design diversity - a review

∑ P( X = x ) P(π , π both fail| input is x) = E ([θ ( X )] )
2

1

X

2

x

(4.4)

= ( E X [θ ( X )]) + VarX [θ ( X )]
2

By VarX ( A) we denote the variance of the random variable A.
It is expression (4.4) which represents the 'unreliability' of a randomly chosen 1-out-of-2 system. Here the first
term on the right is the 'naive' result we would get from an incorrect assumption of independence - simply the product of
the version probabilities of failure on a randomly selected demand. The second term, VarX ( A) , is always nonnegative. Thus incorrectly assuming independence would underestimate the unreliability of a randomly chosen 1-out-of2 system (the probability of both versions failing) by an amount given by the variance of the difficulty function over the
demand space. The more the difficulty varies between demands, the worse the problem.
Example
A simple contrived example may make clearer the ideas used in the EL model. Assume that the demand space
of a program consists of only 5 different demands, D = {x1, x2, x3, x4, x5}, with the demand profile represented by the
probability distribution Q given in Table 1 below.
Assume further that the population of all possible programs is {π1, π2, π3, π4}. These are written to the same
specification and if correct they would produce identical results on each of the 5 demands. Denote by P(πi) the
probability that if asked to write software to the given specification, development teams would create version πi. The
important point here is that some versions will be more likely to be created then others. In reality, we might find that
4

some versions are impossible, in which case P(πi) = 0. Since P(πi) is a probability,

∑ P(π ) = 1. We can think of
i =1

i

P(πi) as characterising the process of version development. If we change the process, the probabilities P(πi) will change.
When the versions are executed, each will either succeed or fail on each demand. Table 1 shows how the four
programs behave on the five demands: here 1 denotes a failure, 0 denotes a success.

π1
π2
π3
π4

x1
Q(x1)=0.99
0
0
0
0
0

P(πi)
P(π1)=0.1
P(π2)=0.2
P(π3)=0.4
P(π4)=0.3
θ(x)

x2
Q(x2)=0.001
1
0
0
0
0.1

Demands
x3
Q(x3)=0.004
0
1
1
0
0.6

x4
Q(x4)=0.0045
1
1
1
0
0.7

x5
Q(x5)=0.0005
0
0
0
1
0.3

Table 1. Illustration of how the EL model works. The notations used are as follows: demands {xi}, demand
profile {Q(xi)}, population of versions {πi}, probabilities of versions {P(πi)}.
The value of the 'difficulty' function θ ( x) on demand x will be the weighted sum of the 0s and 1s of versions
in the column for that demand, the weights being the corresponding probabilities of versions, P(πi). Note that since these
weights characterise the development process, the ‘difficulty’ of a demand depends on the process used to develop
versions. This fits in with intuition: we might expect the failure-proneness of demands to vary according to the kind of
software development used.
In this example, demand x1 is correctly processed by all versions and therefore its difficulty function θ(x1) = 0.
The values of the difficulty function on the other demands varies between 0.1 and 0.7.
The probability of failure of a randomly selected program on a randomly selected demand is the expected value
5

E[Θ] = ∑ Q( xi )θ ( xi ) = 0.0058 .
i =1

For the randomly selected 1-out-of-2 system, according to (4.4), the probability of failure on a randomly
selected demand is:
5

E[Θ 2 ] = ∑ Q( xi )θ 2 ( xi ) = 0.0037.
i =1

12

Modelling software design diversity - a review
In contrast, the naïve assumption of independent failures of both channels would give a very low probability of
system failure,

(E[Θ])2 = (0.0058) 2 = 0.0000336 . In other words, the 1-out-of-2 system is more reliable than a

single version system but substantially worse than would be obtained by assuming (incorrectly) that the versions fail
independently.

4.2 Discussion and intuitive rationale
The Eckhardt and Lee result is an important one because it is the first serious attempt to model in a formal way
the meaning of 'independent development' of software versions. The early practitioners, and their academic counterparts,
had a quite informal understanding of what was meant by 'building two versions independently'. 'Independence' here
seemed to be essentially about process: it meant mainly that the teams did not communicate with one another whilst
building their respective versions. Similarly, there was little thought given to how failure independence might arise even
if the versions were truly 'built independently'. Rather it seemed to be assumed that if the different version development
processes could be controlled so that they could be claimed to be 'independent' (a task that was admitted to be difficult),
a claim for statistical independence of failures could reasonably follow.11
In the previous paragraph, we have used 'independent' (in quotes) to refer to the imprecisely defined
achievement of naturally occurring difference in the development processes, reserving independent (without quotes) to
mean statistically independent (failure processes). The achievement of the EL model is that it gives a statistical meaning
to the former, as well as the latter. Thus (4.2) and (4.3) above can be regarded as meaning that the 'independent
developments' have succeeded in building independent versions, in the sense that, for every demand, knowing whether
one version fails or not does not tell us anything about whether the other version will fail.
This formal interpretation of what is meant by independent versions is, in fact, quite a strong one; advocates of
design diversity might regard it as an ideal, but unrealisable, goal. Eckhardt and Lee show, however, that even this
strong interpretation of version independence falls short of what is needed to claim the unconditional independence that
is the real goal. Even if the strong conditional independence of (4.2) and (4.3) is true, the versions will still fail in a way
that is positively correlated: a 1-out-of-2 system will be less reliable than it would be if the versions really did fail
independently.
The key to the model lies in the variation of difficulty across the demand space. Thus when a demand is
selected at random, the corresponding difficulty must be treated as a random variable: seeing a version fail tells us
something about this random variable, and so changes our distribution for it. In fact, it can be shown [Littlewood &
Miller 1989] that the distributions for θ ( X ) before and after seeing a version failing are stochastically ordered:

θ ( X )|π1 fails > θ ( X )

(4.5)

stoch

The main EL result arises from a quite subtle interplay between conditional and unconditional independence.
Conditionally, i.e. if we know the demand x, the versions fail independently: thus knowing that π1 failed does not
change our belief that π2 will fail. For a new (randomly chosen) unknown demand, however, seeing π1 fail makes us
believe that 'it is probably a difficult demand' - this is the essence of result (4.5) - and thus increases the chance that π2
would also fail. That is, for a randomly chosen X [Littlewood & Miller 1989]:

P(π 1 , π 2 both fail ) Varx [θ ( X )] + ( E x [θ ( X )])
P(π 2 fails|π 1 fails) =
=
=
P (π 1 fails)
E x [θ ( X )]
Varx [θ ( X )]
Varx [θ ( X )]
=
+E x [θ ( X )] = P(π 2 fails) +
≥ P(π 2 fails)
E x [θ ( X )]
E x [θ ( X )]
2

(4.6)

There is equality here if and only if the variance is zero, i.e. θ (x) ≡ θ identically for all x. In other words,
independence of failures of versions is only possible if there is no variation in difficulty. This seems so unlikely in real
problems that it is fair to claim that there will always be positive correlation, and thus system reliability can always be
expected to be lower than it would be if there were independence.
The EL model does not, unfortunately, help us in estimating the reliabilities of particular fault-tolerant diverse
systems. It involves parameters that are unlikely to be estimable in practice. We are unlikely to be able to estimate θ (x)
for any particular x, since this would require us to have a lot of independently developed programs that we could use to
execute x. Thus the key variance term in (4.6) will not be estimable for a new development, although [Nicola & Goyal
1990] shows ways of estimating it given a sample of many developed versions of a program obtained in experiments.

11 For an interesting discussion of the scientific controversy that surrounded some of these early claims, see [Knight &

Leveson 1990] and the sources quoted there.
13

Modelling software design diversity - a review
The main result of EL is a negative one. It tells us that claims for independence of failures even from diverse
software versions cannot be justified. Whilst it should be emphasised that the results do not say that diversity is
ineffective as a means of achieving high reliability, it means that reliability evaluation does not benefit from the fact of
the presence of diversity: we cannot simply argue directly that two 10-3 versions will give us a 10-6 2-version system, so
we must actually measure the reliability of this system.
In the next section we describe the Littlewood and Miller model, which gives a theoretical way out of this
impasse, albeit at the expense of difficulties of other kinds.

4.3 The Littlewood and Miller (LM) model
In EL, independent program development is represented as the independent selection of programs from the
population of all programs that could be written. This is the situation in which any differences between the versions will
arise 'naturally' from the fact of the teams being different and their not communicating with one another.
Instead of merely allowing diversity to arise willy-nilly in this way, another approach is to force diversity in the
development processes of the different versions. Thus it might be insisted that the different teams use different
programming languages, different testing regimes, etc. Such forced diversity has been used in real industrial practice
(e.g. the Airbus A320 flight control software [Briere & Traverse 1993] and in experiments (e.g. the DARTS project
[Smith et al. 1991]).
The LM model generalises the EL model to take account of forced diversity by defining different distributions
over the population of all programs. The set of constraints imposed on the development of a version is called in
[Littlewood & Miller 1989] a methodology, which corresponds to a specific distribution of programs. Thus a program
will have a different probability of selection (i.e. being developed) under methodology A from that under methodology
B. In practice, some programs will be impossible under one methodology, and will thus have zero probability. The effect
of there being these different distributions over the programs is that there are different difficulty functions induced over
the demand space. Thus the probability of a program randomly chosen from methodology A failing on demand x is
denoted by θ A (x) , with a similar interpretation for θ B (x) . The probability of a randomly selected A program failing

(

)

on a randomly selected demand is Ex θ A ( X) , in a similar notation to before.
Once again, we could imagine, in an idealised experiment, estimating θ A (x) by independently selecting many
programs from methodology A, executing each on demand x, and calculating the proportion that fail.
Clearly, the EL model is a special case of LM when θ A (x) = θ B (x) for all x. Interest centres upon cases
where these two difficulty functions are different. Informally, we would like to have difficulty functions such that what
is difficult for A is not difficult for B, and vice versa; i.e. for those x for which θ A (x) is large, θ B (x) tends to be small,
and vice versa. This would be the case if the difficulty functions were negatively correlated.
Consider now the independent development (i.e. selection) of a program using methodology A and a program
using methodology B, π A and π B . Once again it is easy to show that, for any particular demand, x, these two programs
will fail independently:

P( π A , π B fail on x ) = θ A ( x )θ B ( x )

(4.7)

or, putting it a different way

P(π B fails on x|π A fails on x ) = P(π B fails on x ) = θB ( x )

(4.8)

This is just a generalisation of the conditional failure independence in the EL model. Once again, however, we
are interested in the unconditional probability of a randomly selected pair of programs, one from A and one from B, both
failing on a randomly selected demand. This is

Ex (θ A ( X)θ B (X )) = Ex [θ A (X)]E x [θ B ( X)] + Cov(θ A (X)θ B (X))

(

(4.9)

)

where Cov A, B denotes the covariance of two random variables, A and B, which always has the same sign as their
correlation coefficient.
As before, in (4.4), the incorrect, naive 'independent failures' result is the first term on the right hand side: it is
merely the product of the A and B probabilities of failure. The interesting difference between this result and that of EL,
however, is that since the covariance term on the right can be positive or negative, it is no longer certain that the
probability of failure of both randomly selected versions will be greater than the independence case - as was so in (4.4).

14

Modelling software design diversity - a review

4.4 Discussion and implications of the model
The basic intuition that underpins the LM model is simply the notion that what you find difficult, I may find
easy (or at least easier), and vice versa.
The possibility of negative correlation between two difficulty functions means that the reliability of a 1-out-of-2
system could be greater even than it would be under an assumption of independence (given the same version reliabilities
in the two cases). Whether this result has practical usefulness remains moot. It may turn out to be little more than an
interesting mathematical curiosity: certainly there seems no way that such an assumption of negative correlation could
be justified currently in a real application. If we could assume negative correlation (or justify it via some other
arguments, such as analysis of the built versions), we would be in the enviable position of being able to use the
independence-based estimate of the system reliability as a conservative bound on the real reliability.12
Even without the very strong assumption of negative correlation, however, the LM model goes some way to
rescue design diversity from the pessimistic conclusions that arise from the EL model. Specifically, it seems reasonable
to believe that the difficulty functions A and B will always be different. There will always be some differences between
the programming teams, or the methods that they use, that are significant in determining the nature of the errors that they
make. Even if, as seems likely, the difficulty functions are positively correlated, the expected reliability of a 1-out-of-2
system will always be greater under the LM model assumptions than under those of EL (keeping the version reliabilities
fixed between the two cases). In this sense, EL can be seen as the most extremely pessimistic case within the more
general LM model, and it is reasonable to think that it is unattainable.
In [Littlewood & Miller 1989], the authors go further than this and provide some further results for forced
diversity. For example, they prove that for 1-out-of-n systems, when fewer than n methodologies are available, 'all
things being equal' the best design is the one that uses all the methodologies and spreads them as evenly as possible: e.g.
in the case where n=5 and there are three methodologies available, it is better to build a AABBC design than a AAABC
one.
It might be thought that this result is intuitively appealing and unsurprising: after all, it essentially only says that
diversity is 'a good thing'. However, care needs to be taken here since similarly 'obvious' results turn out to be false. For
example, it can be shown that diversity is not necessarily a good thing in the case of 2-out-of-3 systems (or, in general,
in (n+1)-out-of-(2n+1) systems). One can build examples of triples of methodologies, producing versions with the same
probability of failure on a randomly chosen demand, but with such difficulty functions that a methodologically diverse
2-out-of-3 design would be worse than a one-methodology, diverse 2-out-of-3 design and even that the latter would be
worse than a non-diverse 2-out-of-3 design.
It is also useful to point out that, when choosing diverse methodologies to build multiple versions, reducing
correlation between failures of the versions is not the only consideration. The reliability to be expected of individual
versions also matters. The theorems described in this section single out one of the factors determining the pfd of the
redundant system, i.e., the diversity in the difficulty functions of methodologies that are, 'on average', equally good (both
examples and demonstrations are available in [Littlewood & Miller 1989]).
To highlight the effects of other factors in practice, consider a manager who has to build a 1-out-of-2 system.
One could choose a first methodology, A, which is suitable for the application and actually the best methodology in
terms of the reliability it achieves on average. One might then look at other suitable methodologies, seeking one that is
very diverse from A, in that its difficulty function is very different from that of A. Supposing that B satisfies this
requirement, one would still have to consider the probability of joint failure for an AB system. Perhaps B tends to
produce, for this application, programs that are on average much less reliable than those produced by A. It may then
happen that B programs are most likely to fail on different demands from those on which A programs fail (i.e., A and B
are truly 'very diverse'), yet they are still likely to fail on these latter demands with a high enough probability that the pfd
of an AB system is worse than that of an AA system. The dual situation is also possible: although A and B are the best
methodologies, individually, for building this system, both an AA system and an AB system are worse than a CD system,
built out of two methodologies, C and D , which are both inferior, on average, to both A and B but are more diverse. In
conclusion, these theorems using simplified assumptions give qualitative indications on which project decisions are
likely to improve the reliability of a diverse system, but actual predictions of such improvements would require a much
more detailed analysis, and an amount of background statistical knowledge about the effects of development method
which is not usually available.

12 Littlewood and Miller [Littlewood & Miller 1989] compute the correlations from data obtained in the Knight and

Leveson experiment, and data obtained from an error-seeding experiment by Knight and Amman [Knight & Amman
1985]. In the first instance, the correlation is positive, in the second it is negative. This latter case is, in fact, rather a
contrived one, but it does show that negative correlation is possible. However, to establish its presence here requires
samples from the method A and method B programs (13 method A programs and 29 method B programs) - such data
will never be available in realistic non-experimental situations.
15

Modelling software design diversity - a review

4.5 General discussion on the models
The EL model was a considerable advance in our understanding of probabilistic failure behaviour of multiple
diverse software versions. The idea of varying 'difficulty' over the demand space provides an intuitively plausible
mathematical rationale for failure dependence. The LM model somewhat softens the harshly pessimistic EL result.
Nevertheless it leaves in place the single most important practical conclusion from this work, namely that the level of
dependence - particularly independence - between version failures cannot simply be assumed, but must be measured.
The approach used in these models - represented by the formalisation of notions like variation of difficulty and
forced diversity - seems quite powerful and generally applicable. For example, in [Hughes 1987], [Littlewood 1996], the
EL and LM models are generalised to account for common mode failures in non-software based systems. The approach
casts doubt upon claims for failure independence even in 'functionally diverse' systems [Littlewood et al. 1999]. In short,
functional diversity is recommended by the need to reduce correlation among the physical failures of sensors, actuators
and transmission chains, but this argument does not extend to a promise of independence in failures caused by design
faults in the processing. An analysis similar to the ones in the previous section shows that the 'difficulty functions' for the
developers of the two versions must be considered. Functional diversity, as a way of tolerating design faults, must be
seen as a special kind of 'forced' design diversity, requiring positive evidence for any claim of low correlation between
failures.
It should be emphasised that most of the results arising from the models concern averages - over demand
spaces, over populations of programs, etc. Thus the 'difficulty function' in EL, the probability that a randomly chosen
program will fail on x, is an average over all programs. The 'reliabilities' are averages over programs and demands.
Actual realisations may differ from these averages. We have already noted that Knight and Leveson found their 2-outof-3 systems an order of magnitude more reliable than the single versions on average, but there were particular single
versions that were more reliable than particular 2-out-of-3 systems. In the absence of information about the particular e.g. when taking an early design decision as to whether to use forced or unforced diversity - these average results give
useful guidance. But they do not allow strong claims to be made for a particular system - e.g. a particular system based
upon forced diversity. In other words, they do not absolve us of the responsibility to evaluate what has actually been
achieved.
In addition, the results all concern preferences - the theorems involve inequalities - and do not quantify the
advantages of different approaches. Thus the LM results that say that forced diversity is 'a good thing', do not tell us how
much improvement will be delivered in a particular instance. Once again, this observation does not undermine the
models' general recommendations for ways of best achieving reliability, but it provides further evidence that the problem
of evaluating what has been achieved still remains.

5 Practical implications of reliability models for diverse systems
5.1 Achievement of reliability
The models described so far give a seemingly obvious indication for developers and managers: diversity is
useful, and once diversity has been chosen, 'forcing' diversity is better than just letting it happen willy-nilly. For
instance, when choosing the methods to be used in a component activity of development (say, design specification, or
testing) for two program versions, we should try to choose methods that create diverse difficulty functions for the people
using them13. For instance, if we could identify two main classes of demands, D1 and D2, we would then try to choose
two methods that, although equal in average quality, differ in the demand class on which they are most effective. If we
first chose to build one version with method A, knowing that A is most effective on obtaining good reliability for
demands of class D1, we would then try and choose for the second version a development method that yields the same
reliability as A on average, but is especially good for programming the response to demands of class D2.
This simple example also shows the practical limitations of this qualitative advice:
-

We seldom know the strengths and weaknesses of the different methods available. When we know them, it is
usually in terms of the likelihood of people making mistakes, not of the likelihood that the defects caused by
these mistakes cause failures in operation (which depends not only on the defects being present but also on the
probabilities of the various demands);

-

This advice is valid when all the methods from which we choose offer the same guarantees of reliability. When

13 Diversity could even extend to the choice of staff, so that a certain role in one team is filled by a person whose main

strength is in dealing with demands of class DA, the same role in the other team is given to a person with more
expertise on demands of class DB. The practical difficulties in this approach are obvious, though it may be feasible in
some projects. On the other hand, practices like having requirement reviews conducted by staff with diverse expertise
are justified, and to an extent can be guided, by considerations like these.
16

Modelling software design diversity - a review
this is not true, we have to trade off the degree of diversity between versions against the risk of lower reliability
in the version developed with the worse method. To know whether we would be better off with the two diverse
methods or just using the better one for both versions, we would need to quantify their differences in some
detail, and such quantitative knowledge is usually missing;
-

Developing a system or program includes many interacting activities, so that the forms in which diversity
could be applied are many. If we had, say, two programming languages L1 and L2 and two test methods T1 and
T2, these two activities alone would allow four diverse combinations from which to choose. Knowledge of the
pair-wise diversities (between languages and between test methods) is not sufficient to know about the diversity
among the four combinations;

-

All these decisions are subject to practical constraints, which may help pruning the list of possible choices, but
introduce additional criteria to be satisfied. For instance, the expertise of existing staff must be used; methods
that have achieved particular results in other environments may not achieve the same in the environment of the
current project; methods of similar quality may differ in cost, and thus differently affect the resources available
for other activities.

In the end, all these problems indicate that we need a better ability to predict the effects of the means by which
we try to achieve diversity. Developing better rules for using diversity depends on developing better models to predict
and assess the effects of the specific ways of pursuing it.

5.2 Reliability of a specific two-version system
5.2.1 Prediction for an individual system: distribution of pfd vs. average pfd
The conceptual models presented in section 4 describe what happens 'on average' and help our understanding of
the problems, but do not help us to evaluate a specific pair of versions.
In practice, when we deal with the specific pair of versions developed, we wish to know that the pfd of the
pair14 is lower than a certain bound, with a certain probability. In other words, since we know that the pfd of an
individual pair may be very different from the average, we will need information about the probability distribution of the
pfd, rather than just its average. The probability distribution provides the answers to questions of the form 'What is the
probability that this particular pair has a satisfactorily low pfd?'.
What can be said about design preferences in terms of distributions is rather simple. Given a single-version, 1out-of-2 system, if we substitute one of the two channels with a different implementation, the pfd of the resulting system
will obviously be no worse than that of the original, single-version system. If we consider, rather than an individual 1version and an individual 2-version system obtained from it, the distributions of their pfd, it turns out that the twoversion system would have both a better mean pfd and a better confidence level for any chosen upper bound.15

14 We will use the phrase 'pfd of the pair', informally, to mean 'probability of failure on demand of a 1-out-of-2 system

built from this pair, with perfectly reliable adjudication'.
15 A way of stating these results is that 'diversity is always beneficial'. This must be qualified: to build a 1-out-of-2

system (with perfect adjudication), choosing from a given population of possible versions, it is always better to
choose two versions for the two channels, rather than the same version for both of them. If instead the choice is
between a pair of versions built to a certain quality standard, and a single version built to a higher standard, the issue
becomes one of cost-effectiveness and returns from additional effort spent on quality, as discussed in Section 3.
17

Modelling software design diversity - a review

Cumulative distribution

Density function

1
B

0.8
Required upper
bound on pfd

0.6
0.4

A

0.2

Required upper
bound on pfd
A

B

0
pfd

pfd

Figure 5. Two hypothetical distribution of pfd for systems developed with different methods. Method
B gives a higher (worse) expected value of pfd, but better confidence that the requirement on the pfd is
satisfied.
It is appropriate to point out that a requirement of a high confidence level for a certain upper bound on the pfd
may in principle require different design decisions from those required to achieve a low average pfd. For instance, the
graph in Figure 5 shows two probability distributions, A and B, such that A has the lower (better) average pfd, but B
gives a higher confidence of a pfd smaller than a required bound. The 'tail' of the density function for distribution B
beyond the required bound has a smaller area than the tail of distribution A. In other words, system design decisions that
produced distribution A would give a better average reliability over many produced systems; but system design
decisions that produced distribution B would give a better probability of any individual system satisfying its
requirements. No study so far has pointed to such counterintuitive situations, but their occurrence cannot be excluded.
More importantly, there are scenarios in which diversity produces only a small improvement in the average pfd
of versions, but a more sizeable improvement in the requirements that can be satisfied with high confidence. For
instance, the situation depicted in the table below would arguably be very satisfactory:

mean pfd
single-version system
two-version system

99th percentile (pfd that can be certified with
99% confidence)

10-3

10-2

0.5 10-3

10-3

2

10

ratio improvement obtained by diversity

Table 2 A hypothetical desirable scenario for the application of diversity.
In this scenario, the reliability requirement that can be satisfied with 99% probability is an order of magnitude
better with a two-version system than with a one-version system. What kind of methodology for producing pairs of
versions would be likely to produce such results? In terms of the population of the versions that can potentially be
produced with the methodology, the numbers in the table above would indicate that the more reliable versions all tend to
suffer from faults causing failures on the same set of demands (hence the small gain in the average pfd achieved by
diversity); however, any additional faults present in the less reliable versions are spread over different demands, so that
they are relatively unlikely to cause system failures in the 2-version system.
These considerations show the importance of the whole distribution of the pfd. With the models introduced in
Section 4, this distribution is completely determined by the difficulty functions, which characterise the 'methodologies'
for producing program versions, together with the demand profile (the probabilities of the various demands on the
system) of the usage environment. However, the difficulty functions are unknown in practice. A recent line of research
for improving this situation studies the distributions that can be expected in practice; early considerations on the effects
of plausible distributions were reported in [Popov et al. 1998]. Another aspect of great interest is how development
processes may affect diversity, i.e., what one may hope to know about these distributions, or notional populations of
versions from which the version in a specific systems have been 'extracted'. This kind of knowledge, even in a
qualitative or imprecise form, is of great relevance for design decisions. We will return to this topic in the section
'Summary and open issues'.
In the next two subsections, we study the reliability of a specific two-version system seen by itself, without any
reference to notional populations of versions. We thus address the problem of assessing a 2-version system, without any
knowledge about the distributions that can be expected from the development methods used.

18

Modelling software design diversity - a review
5.2.2 Completely known versions
As a first step, we can describe the pfd of a pair of versions, A and B, that are completely known: for each
demand, we know whether it is a failure point for version A and/or for version B. This unrealistic case will show the way
for developing more practical prediction procedures. We can describe this knowledge as a pair of binary functions, ωA(x)
and ωB(x) describing the behaviours of version A and B, respectively, on the demand x. Saying that, for instance, ωA(x)
= 1 means that version A deterministically fails on demand x. Then the probabilities of failure of versions A and B on a
randomly selected demand X (probability of failure per execution) are:
PA≡ P(A fails on X)=E(ωA(X))=

∑ Q( x)ω ( x) and
A

x ∈D

PB≡ P(B fails on X)=E(ωB(X))=

∑ Q( x )ω ( x)
B

x ∈D

where D denotes the demand space and Q(x) is the probability that x will be input to the software (the demand profile of
the software). For a specific demand x, the probability of common failure is then either 0 or 1:
P(A fails on x and B fails on x)= ω A ( x ) ω B ( x )
pfdAB=P(A and B fail on randomly chosen demand) =

∑ Q( x) ω ( x) ω ( x )
A

x ∈D

(5.1)

B

It turns out that this expression can be written as:
pfdAB= PA PB+ cov(ΩA, ΩB)

(5.2)

where the random variables ΩA and ΩB are defined as the values taken by ωA and ωB on a randomly chosen demand.
Equation (5.2) is very similar to (4.9) in section 4.3, but (4.9) is based on the 'difficulty functions' for two
different 'development methodologies', which can take any value between 0 and 1 (representing the probability that a
randomly chosen version, developed with that methodology, would fail on a given demand). Here, instead, we are
describing two known versions. The functions ωA(x) and ωB(x) can only take the values 0 and 1, and the only uncertainty
concerns the choice of the next demand, x, described by the probability distribution Q(x).
5.2.3 Using results from testing: subdomains, modes of operation
The description given in the previous section would only be useful if one knew the behaviour of each version
on each possible demand, i.e., for each demand whether it is a failure point or a success point, for each version. This
level of detailed knowledge is normally unattainable. The knowledge that can be obtained is at a much coarser level: by
realistic testing, we can make predictions about the likelihood of each version failing on a randomly chosen demand. We
can also specialise this knowledge slightly, by testing separately for separate classes of demands. Subdividing demands
into classes is common practice for designers (e.g., in terms of modes of operation of a system) and software testers, who
call these classes sub-domains (in the demand space, often called the 'input space' or 'input domain' of a program). For
instance, testers find it useful to define sub-domains on the basis of which 'function' of the program (as defined in its
requirements) the demands invoke, or on the basis of which parts of the code they cause to be executed.
Referring again to a system of two versions, A and B, let us consider a division of the demand space into
subdomains that completely cover the demand space, without any overlapping between them (a partition over the
demand space). We call the subdomains themselves S1, S2, …, Sn. We can define the probability of failure of a version
when subjected only to demands from a specific subdomain, e.g. P(A fails| Si) will designate the probability that A fails
on a demand chosen randomly from subdomain Si, according to the probability distribution of demands in actual
operation. We can then write the probability of common failure as:
pfdAB=P(A,B fail)=

∑ P( A, B fail| S ) P(S )
i

i

(5.3)

i

The models described in section 4 apply again within each subdomain, that is, in general:
P(A,B fail | Si) ≠ P(A fails | Si) P(B fails | Si),

(5.4)

Equality would only apply in special cases, e.g. hardware-only versions that are subject only to physical failures
and for which the stress to which they are subject is known to be constant across a certain class of demands. In most
cases, one would expect a restricted class of demands to pose similar problems to the designers of two versions, so that
the EL model would apply: in each subdomain, the left-hand term in (5.4) would be greater than the right-hand term. So,
in practice, a regulator can use the sum in the left-hand side of the following expression:

19

Modelling software design diversity - a review

∑ P ( A fail| Si ) P( B fail| Si ) P (Si ) ≤ ∑ P ( A, B fail| Si ) P(Si ) =pfdAB
i

(5.5)

i

as a claim limit for the pfd of a two-version system.
Even if formula (5.4) could be written with an equal sign (independent failures of the two versions, conditional
on demands from a given subdomain) for all subdomains, this would not imply unconditional independence of failure.
In terms of reliability estimates over subdomains, pfdAB can be written, in a general form, as:
pfdAB=P(A fails) P(B fails) + cov1 + cov2

(5.6)

where the term cov1 is obtained by considering the pfd values of the two versions as functions of the subdomains, and
taking their covariance over all the subdomains,
cov1=

∑ ( P( A fails | S ) − P( A fails))( P( B fails | S ) − P( B fails)) P(S )
i

i

i

(5.7)

i

and the term cov2 is obtained by computing the covariance of the Ω functions of the two versions in each subdomain,
and taking its average over all subdomains:
cov2=

∑ (cov(Ω , Ω | S )) P(S ) =
1

2

i

i

i





∑  ∑ (ω ( x ) − P( A fails| S ))(ω ( x) − P( B fails | S )) P( x| S ) P(S )
A

i

x ∈Si

i

B

i

i

i

(5.8)

Each term in the inner sum above represents the difference between the two sides of inequality (5.4). Assuming
each such term to be 0, i.e., conditional independence within each subdomain, makes cov2 equal to zero.
There is a general similarity between the mathematics in section 4 and in the parts of this section leading to
equations (5.2) and (5.6). In section 4, the models described the expected behaviour of two randomly chosen versions,
given the 'difficulty functions' that specify their likelihood of failing on individual demands. Equation (5.2) described
failures of two specific versions, given detailed knowledge of whether they fail or succeed for every specific demand.
Equation (5.6) again describes two specific versions, given 'coarser-grained' knowledge about their failures for classes of
demands, and again it can be shown that the probability of common failure is equal to the product of the versions'
individual probabilities, plus covariance terms. All these cases are mathematically similar. Even given a knowledge that
the two versions fail independently in every possible special condition (conditional independence on demands or classes
thereof), the existence of variation between demands or classes thereof makes it impossible to deduce automatically that
the versions fail independently for demands drawn from the whole demand space. Under the EL scenario of two
versions drawn from the same distribution (i.e., developed with the same methodology, yielding similar difficulty
functions over the demand space), we would expect the 'average' pair of versions to show both positively correlated
failures over each subdomain, and positively correlated probabilities of failure per subdomain, over the set of all
subdomains. This latter property implies that the claim limit defined by inequality (5.5), once estimated in practice, is
likely to be more stringent (to admit a weaker reliability claim, corresponding to a higher pfd) than the simpler limit
given by P(A fails) P(B fails).
Equation (5.6) describes essentially the same phenomenon as equation (5.2), only substituting the probability of
failure over a subdomain for the deterministic failure on an individual demand. One can see that this expression applies
for any possible subdivision of the history of demands on the system into disjoint subsets. Instead of subdividing the
demands statically on the basis of the values of the sensor inputs, we could classify them on the basis of any other
variable likely to affect the pfd, e.g. modes of operation of the plant under which the demands originate16. A special
case corresponds to the model described in [Hughes 1987], [Littlewood 1996] for the failure of hardware-only systems,
in which the 'subdomains' are interpreted as conditions of operation producing different levels of stress on the redundant
components, and the components themselves are assumed to fail independently conditionally on the current operating
condition.

5.3. Extension to continuous-operation systems (control systems)
So far, we have described our versions in terms of their responses to discrete demands, which are chosen from
the demand space in statistically independent ways. There are systems (typically continuous control systems) for which
this description is difficult to apply, in that there is no natural subdivision of their execution histories into isolated,
16 The difference is that with this latter subdivision two identical demands could be classified as belonging to different

classes because they took place during segments of operation that are classified differently, e.g. productions vs
maintenance phases in a production plant, or even night shift vs daytime shift. The same equations still hold, provided
that the classification of the demands is consistent.
20

Modelling software design diversity - a review
statistically independent demands. For these systems, the measure sought is often the reliability function in continuous
time, R(t), rather than the pfd.
Reliability can be evaluated via testing, both for single-version systems and fault-tolerant systems considered as
'black boxes' [Littlewood & Strigini 1998]. The basic problems are similar to those affecting assessment of ‘on-demand’
systems discussed so far in this paper. But when we try to study how the behaviours of diverse versions interact to
produce the behaviour of a diverse system, some new possibilities and difficulties arise. We summarise these here,
referring the reader to [Popov & Strigini 1998] for further information.
5.3.1 Pitfalls in fine-grain modelling of execution sequences
For any (single- or multiple-version) design, there are two extreme ways of describing the execution of
continuous control systems [Strigini 1996], [Littlewood & Strigini 1998]:
-

as a special case of systems subject to independent demands, to which we can apply the models described in
this paper. As 'demands', we designate long periods of execution, either corresponding to whole missions (an
aircraft's flight, the whole period of operation of a plant between two periods of inactivity), or simply long
enough that the dependency between the software's behaviour in two of these periods can be neglected;

-

in finer detail, by considering that each version repeatedly executes a 'read sensors, process the readings, output
results' cycle. So, a control system is seen as subject to long series of non-independent 'demands', where one
demand is just one reading of the software's input variables. For this case, we will say that each reading is 'one
input', and the successive inputs form a trajectory in an 'input space', having as many dimensions as the number
of input variables read by the software. Models assuming independence between successive steps have been
published, and some have explored the effects of dependence between them [Bondavalli et al. 1999].

This second, more detailed approach runs into many problems in practical use. For instance, to be useful it
requires one to describe the dependency between failures on successive inputs. There are many reasons for believing that
these are positively correlated [Strigini 1996], but no simple way of estimating the degree of correlation. This problem is
present even with a single-version system; when dealing with multiple versions, further problems appear. For instance,
the models must represent the fact that each step of execution is affected not only by sensor inputs, but by the values of
the software's internal variables. So, the values of internal variables must be considered as additional 'inputs' that the
versions read. But then the sequences of inputs read by two versions are not equal (not even approximately equal, since
software faults may cause the internal variables of one version to take arbitrary incorrect values), and modelling how
they are related becomes hopelessly difficult. In conclusion, for practical purposes of measurement and inference the
first, coarser-grained of the two modelling options listed is the convenient one.
5.3.2 Medium-grain models: transitions between modes of operation with different reliability
We have seen that very detailed models of the versions' behaviour over time (as opposed to responses to a
single demand) are too difficult to apply, but we may hope to apply such models to coarser descriptions of the input
sequences, as done in Section 5.2 with subdomains of the demand space. There are cases in which the reliability (or the
failure rate) of the software can be estimated separately for different conditions of operation, corresponding to different
regimes of operation of the controlled system or states of its environment. The evolution of the operating conditions can
be modelled by a Markov chain or other stochastic models. Each state in the chain corresponds to a different operating
condition, characterised by a failure rate for [each version of] the software. Knowing these failure rates, and the rate of
common failures, for each condition of operation, it is then possible to predict the reliability of the software, and also to
see how it would be affected by changes in the way conditions of operation alternate over time.
Once more, it can be shown that if these failure rates differ, any statement of independence conditional on one
state in the Markov chain (i.e., one operating condition) does not extend to unconditional independence. Apart from this,
no simple general rule can be stated. Both the covariance between the failure rates of the versions over the set of
operating conditions and the rates of transition between these conditions affect the unconditional failure rate of the
system. For instance, knowing that two versions exhibit independent failures on individual execution steps, conditional
on the condition of operation, does not allow one to conclude anything about the correlation between their failures over
a whole mission: the probability of both versions suffering a failure before the end of the mission may or may not be
greater than the product of the probabilities for the two individual versions, depending on the detailed statistical
properties of the succession of conditions of operation. Even though they give no simple general guidance, these models
can be used for practical predictions on a specific system, if the various parameters are estimated by testing; but in
practice this estimation will usually be no less expensive than direct estimation of the system's reliability. In conclusion,
again, more detailed models than those described in this paper have not produced, so far, appreciable benefits.

21

Modelling software design diversity - a review

6 Summary and open issues
This survey has shown that assessing the reliability of diverse systems, and guiding decisions to engineer these
systems, are hard problems. It is useful now to recall which solid knowledge is available, and which questions are open
to research.

6.1 What is known
When planning to build a new system, we should expect a 1-out-of-n system built with different versions to be
substantially more reliable than one using multiple copies of one of the versions. This is a precise indication for builders
of simple, parallel-redundant protection systems. Doubts arise in two forms:
-

there are systems for which a diverse structure causes serious design difficulties compared to a non-diverse
redundant structure. This complexity might offset the gain achievable from diversity. This problem will mostly
be felt in majority-voted and/or active-control systems, rather than in simple ‘1-out-of-N’ safety systems like
the one in Fig. 4;

-

with a limited budget, it is uncertain whether concentrating all efforts on one version might produce higher
reliability than dividing them over multiple, diverse versions. This doubt is strongest in projects with great
freedom effectively to trade-off improvement efforts between versions. It is least strong in projects in which it
is believed that no useful effort has been spared in making the individual versions as reliable as possible; and in
those projects which are restricted to combining pre-existing products.

When the time comes to assess the reliability achieved by a fault-tolerant system, the presence of diversity does
not help much. In particular, we should not expect failures of diverse versions to be independent. Apart from
experimental results to this effect, this statement is supported by conceptual models that are very widely applicable.
These models predict that guaranteeing independence between the developments of two versions should be expected to
yield positive correlation between failures of the versions. They also show a general direction for efforts towards
reducing this correlation.

6.2 The ubiquity of 'variation of difficulty'
The EL, LM models described in section 4 turn out to be applicable to describing many situations characterised
by variation of some 'stress' or 'unreliability' factor over a space. Very similar or identical mathematical expressions turn
out to be useful for modelling, for instance:
-

the probability of common failure of two specific software versions, or more generally, any two diverse
(hardware and/or software) channels (Chapter 5);

-

the likelihood that design faults will remain undetected through two applications of (the same or two different)
fault-finding techniques [Littlewood et al. to appear];

-

the likelihood of common mistakes by different persons performing the same task.

Any detailed understanding of how diversity is achieved through software or system development depends on
modelling several such situations. In the development of a system, diversity of human errors between the teams
performing the same stage of development activities on the diverse versions, diversity in the effect of human errorproneness under diverse development constraints, diversity between the fault-removing activities applied to each version
in sequence, all matter. Many of these detailed aspects of diversity have not been studied empirically yet, but it appears
that any mathematical advance will be of immediate benefit in modelling all of them.

6.3 Open questions and research in progress
In practice, design decisions and reliability assessment are interdependent activities. A requirement on designs
is that the system they produce should be easy to assess; and reliability assessment relies in part on what is known about
the performance of the design and development methods employed. Research is needed on both these aspects:
-

for reliability assessment: improving on current methods for assessment, taking advantage as fully as possible
of all system-specific information: both about the design decisions and about the results of product-based
validation;

-

for reliability achievement: suggesting directives or decision criteria for design and project management to
improve the reliability of diverse systems; e.g. advice on how best to 'force' diversity, issues of trade-offs
between individual version reliability and diversity between versions.

The two goals are interrelated, in that any rational justification of design and management decisions must be
based on some kind of ability to forecast their effects. In more detail:

22

Modelling software design diversity - a review
-

-

the task of 'assessment' has two sides:
•

predicting the effects of decisions made in development on achieved reliability. Research here has to explore
the empirical evidence available about these effects in the generality of systems and build predictive models
linking observable characteristics of a specific development process and its product to future reliability.
These models are useful for achieving reliability, by indicating which decisions are likely to improve results,
even when their predictions are too imprecise for assessment of the finished product. For reliability
assessment, their role is, formally speaking, to produce prior probabilities for inference from direct, systemspecific evidence of reliability; informally, to give approximate but useful indicators of the reliability range
to be expected;

•

inferring future reliability from direct evidence (testing and operation). Here, Bayesian inference provides a
sound framework, but research is needed to make it useful in practice. Two requirements are to ensure that
the necessary calculations are feasible, possibly by finding suitable approximation methods, and to produce
guidance in choosing priors, via models as described above and via methods for obtaining satisfactory
approximations and bounds on the required predictions;
findings about methods for reliability assessment also affect reliability achievement by suggesting which
decisions will make it easier to assess the reliability of the resulting product against its requirements. This
applies even to assessment methods that are strictly a posteriori, and thus cannot inform about which decision
will produce better reliability.

All this research depends on three sources of knowledge: experimental evidence in its two forms of experience
from real-world projects and from controlled experiments, and theoretical modelling. Experimental evidence is essential,
but both its sources are severely limited because of costs. Real-world systems are few and heterogeneous, and fewer data
are available about them than would be desirable. Controlled experiments cannot achieve both realism and statistical
significance at affordable cost. They must therefore be focused to address specific conjectures, which if validated can be
combined via theoretical modelling to produce results of practical relevance. In short, no practical directive for
designers and assessors can be expected from experimental evidence alone. Theoretical work is necessary to distil sparse
statistical data into conjectures, direct the testing of these conjectures and combine the resulting knowledge into useful
practical directives. Among other benefits from theoretical work, there is a hope of gleaning useful information for
diversity research from the data that have been collected in experiments aimed at other problems in software engineering
or cognitive psychology.

Acknowledgement
This work was funded partially under the UK HSE Generic Nuclear Safety Research Programme (under the
'Diverse Software PrOject' (DISPO)) and by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
under the 'Diversity In Safety Critical Software' (DISCS) project and is published with the permission of the UK
Nuclear Industry Management Committee (IMC).

References
[Adams 1984] E. N. Adams, “Optimizing preventive service of software products”, IBM Journal of Research
and Development, 28 (1), pp.2-14, 1984.
[Ammann & Knight 1988] P. E. Ammann and J. C. Knight, “Data Diversity: An Approach to Software Fault
Tolerance”, IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-37 (4), pp.418-425, 1988.
[Anderson et al. 1985] T. Anderson, P. A. Barrett, D. N. Halliwell and M. R. Moulding, “An Evaluation of
Software Fault Tolerance in a Practical System”, in 15th IEEE Int. Symp. on Fault-Tolerant Computing (FTCS-15), Ann
Arbor, Mich., pp.140-145, 1985.
[Babbage 1974] C. Babbage, “On the Mathematical Powers of the Calculating Engine (Unpublished
manuscript, December 1837)”, in The Origins of Digital Computers: Selected Papers (B. Randell, Ed.), pp.17-52,
Springer, 1974.
[Bishop 1988] P. G. Bishop, “The PODS diversity experiment”, in Software Diversity in Computerized Control
Systems (U. Voges, Ed.), pp.51-84, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[Bishop & Pullen 1988] P. G. Bishop and F. D. Pullen, “PODS Revisited - A Study of Software Failure
Behaviour”, in 18th International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, Tokyo, Japan, pp.1-8, IEEE Computer
Society Press, 1988.
[Blough & Sullivan 1990] D. M. Blough and G. Sullivan, “A Comparison of Voting Strategies for FaultTolerant Distributed Systems”, in 9th Symp. on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS-9), Huntsville, Alabama, pp.136145, 1990.

23

Modelling software design diversity - a review
[Bondavalli et al. 1999] A. Bondavalli, S. Chiaradonna, F. D. Giandomenico and L. Strigini, “A Contribution
to the Evaluation of the Reliability of Iterative-Execution Software”, Software Testing, Verification and Reliability, 9 (3)
1999.
[Briere & Traverse 1993] D. Briere and P. Traverse, “Airbus A320/A330/A340 Electrical Flight Controls - A
Family Of Fault-Tolerant Systems”, in 23rd International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing (FTCS-23),
Toulouse, France, 22 - 24, pp.616-623, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1993.
[Di Giandomenico & Strigini 1990] F. Di Giandomenico and L. Strigini, “Adjudicators for Diverse-Redundant
Components”, in 9th Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS-9), Huntsville, Alabama, pp.114-123, IEEE,
1990.
[Dyer 1992] M. Dyer, The Cleanroom Approach to Quality Software Development, Software Engineering
Practice, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 1992.
[Eckhardt & Lee 1985] D. E. Eckhardt and L. D. Lee, “A theoretical basis for the analysis of multiversion
software subject to coincident errors”, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, SE-11 (12), pp.1511-1517, 1985.
[FAA 1985] FAA, Federal Aviation Administration, Advisory Circular, N°AC 25.1309-1A, 1985.
[Hagelin 1988] G. Hagelin, “ERICSSON Safety Systems for Railway Control”, in Software diversity in
computerized control systems (U. Voges, Ed.), 2, pp.11-21, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[Huang et al. 1995] Y. Huang, C. Kintala, N. Kolettis and N. D. Fulton, “Software Rejuvenation: Analysis,
Module and Applications”, in 25th International Symposium on Fault Tolerant Computing (FTCS-25), Pasadena ,
California, U.S.A., IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995.
[Hughes 1987] R. P. Hughes, “A New Approach to Common Cause Failure”, Reliability Engineering, 17,
pp.211-236, 1987.
[Kantz & Koza 1995] H. Kantz and C. Koza, “The ELEKTRA Railway Signalling-System: Field Experience
with an Actively Replicated System with Diversity”, in 25th IEEE Annual International Symposium on Fault -Tolerant
Computing (FTCS-25), Pasadena, California, pp.453-458, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1995.
[Kersken & Saglietti 1992] M. Kersken and F. Saglietti (Eds.), Software Fault Tolerance: Achievement and
Assessment Strategies, Research reports ESPRIT, Springer-Verlag, 1992.
[Knight & Amman 1985] J. C. Knight and P. E. Amman, “An Experimental evaluation of simple methods for
seeding program errors”, in 8th International Conference on Software Engineering, pp.337-342, IEEE Computer
Society, 1985.
[Knight & Leveson 1986] J. C. Knight and N. G. Leveson, “An Experimental Evaluation of the Assumption of
Independence in Multi-Version Programming”, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, SE-12 (1), pp.96-109,
1986.
[Knight & Leveson 1990] J. C. Knight and N. G. Leveson, “A reply to the criticism of the Knight & Leveson
experiment”, ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, Vol. 15, No. 1, January, pp.24-35, 1990.
[Laprie et al. 1990] J. C. Laprie, J. Arlat, C. Beounes and K. Kanoun, “Definition and Analysis of Hardwareand-Software Fault-Tolerant Architectures”, IEEE Computer, 23 (7), pp.39-51, 1990.
[Laryd 1994] A. Laryd, “Operating experience of software in programmable equipment used in ABB Atom
nuclear I&C application”, in Advanced Control and Instrumentation Systems in Nuclear Power Plants. Design,
Verification and Validation. IAEA/IWG/ATWR & NPPCI Technical Committee Meeting, Espoo, Finland, (VTT-SYMP147), pp.31-42, 1994.
[Lee & Iyer 1995] I. Lee and R. K. Iyer, “Software Dependability in the Tandem GUARDIAN System”, IEEE
Transactions on Software Engineering, 21 (5), pp.455-467, 1995.
[Lindeberg 1993] J. F. Lindeberg, “The Swedish State Railways' Experience with n-version Programmed
Systems”, in Directions in Safety-Critical Systems (F. Redmill and T. Anderson, Eds.), p.36, Springer-Verlag, 1993.
[Littlewood 1996] B. Littlewood, “The impact of diversity upon common mode failures”, Reliability
Engineering and System Safety, 51, pp.101-113, 1996.
[Littlewood & Miller 1989] B. Littlewood and D. R. Miller, “Conceptual Modelling of Coincident Failures in
Multi-Version Software”, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, SE-15 (12), pp.1596-1614, 1989.
[Littlewood et al. 1999] B. Littlewood, P. Popov and L. Strigini, “A note on reliability estimation of
functionally diverse systems”, Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 66, pp.93-95, 1999.
[Littlewood et al. to appear] B. Littlewood, P. Popov, L. Strigini and N. Shryane, “Modelling the effects of
combining diverse software fault removal techniques”, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering to appear.

24

Modelling software design diversity - a review
[Littlewood & Strigini 1993] B. Littlewood and L. Strigini, “Validation of Ultra-High Dependability for
Software-based Systems”, Communications of the ACM, 36 (11), pp.69-80, 1993.
[Littlewood & Strigini 1998] B. Littlewood and L. Strigini, Guidelines for the statistical testing of software,
Centre for Software Reliability, City University, Technical Report, July 1998.
[Lyu 1995] M. R. Lyu (Ed.), Software Fault Tolerance, Trends in Software, 337p., Wiley, 1995.
[Lyu 1996] M. R. Lyu (Ed.), Handbook of Software Reliability Engineering, IEEE Computer Society Press and
McGraw-Hill, 1996.
[Migneault 1982] G. E. Migneault, The Cost of Software Fault Tolerance, NASA Langley Research Center,
Technical Memorandum, N°TM-84546, September 1982.
[MoD 1996] MoD, Safety Management Requirements for
Defence Standard, N°00-56, Issue 2, December 1996.

Defence Systems, U.K. Ministry of Defence,

[MoD 1997] MoD, Requirements for Safety Related Software in Defence Equipment, U.K. Ministry of
Defence, Defence Standard, N°00-55, Issue 2, August 1997.
[Mongardi 1993] G. Mongardi, “Dependable Computing for Railway Control Systems”, in 3rd IFIP Int.
Working Conference on Dependable Computing for Critical Applications (DCCA-3), Mondello, Italy, pp.255-277, 1993.
[Musa 1993] J. D. Musa, “Operational Profiles in Software-Reliability Engineering”, IEEE Software, March,
pp.14-32, 1993.
[Nicola & Goyal 1990] V. F. Nicola and A. Goyal, “Modeling of Correlated Failures and Community Error
Recovery in Multiversion Software”, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 16 (3), pp.350-359, 1990.
[Popov et al. 1998] P. Popov, L. Strigini and M. Pizza, “The efficacy of diverse redundancy against design
error: some practical considerations”, in INucE Third International Conference on Control and Instrumentation in
Nuclear Installations, Edinburgh, U.K., 1998.
[Popov & Strigini 1998] P. T. Popov and L. Strigini, “Conceptual models for the reliability of diverse systems
- new results”, in 28th International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing (FTCS-28), Munich, Germany, pp.80-89,
IEEE Computer Society Press, 1998.
[RTCA/EuroCAE 1992] RTCA/EuroCAE, DO-178B, Software Considerations in Airborne Systems and
Equipment Certification, N°RTCA DO-178B/EUROCAE ED-12B, December 1992.
[Shooman 1996] M. Shooman, “Avionics Software Problem Occurrence Rates”, in ISSRE'96, Seventh
International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering, White Plains, New York, U.S.A., pp.55-64, 1996.
[Smith et al. 1991] I. C. Smith, D. N. Wall and J. A. Baldwin, “DARTS - an experiment into cost of and
diversity in safety critical computer systems”, in IFAC/IFIP/EWICS/SRE Symposium on Safety of Computer Control
Systems (SAFECOMP '91), (J. F. Lindeberg, Ed.), Trondheim, Norway, pp.35-39, Pergamon Press, 1991.
[Strigini 1996] L. Strigini, “On testing process control software for reliability assessment: the effects of
correlation between successive failures”, Software Testing Verification and Reliability, 6 (1), pp.36-48, 1996.
[Traverse 1988] P. J. Traverse, “AIRBUS and ATR System Architecture and Specification”, in Software
diversity in computerized control systems (U. Voges, Ed.), 2, pp.95-104, Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[Turner et al. 1987] D. B. Turner, R. D. Burns and H. Hecht, “Designing micro-based systems for fail-safe
travel”, IEEE Spectrum, 24 (2), pp.58-63, 1987.
[Voges 1988] U. Voges (Ed.), Software diversity in computerized control systems, Dependable Computing and
Fault-Tolerance series, 2, Springer-Verlag, Wien, 1988.
[Voges 1994] U. Voges, “Software diversity”, Reliability Engineering and System Safety, 43 (2), pp.103-110,
1994.
[Voges & Gmeiner 1979] U. Voges and L. Gmeiner, “Software Diversity in Reactor protection System: An
Experiment”, in IFAC Workshop, SAFECOMP'79, Stuttgart, 16-18 May 1979, pp.73-79., 1979.
[Yeh 1998] Y. C. B. Yeh, “Design Considerations in Boeing 777 Fly-By-Wire Computers”, in 3rd IEEE HighAssurance Systems Engineering Symposium (HASE), Washington, DC, USA, pp.64-73, IEEE Computer Society Press,
1998.

25

