THIRD SUPPLEMENT DATED 19APRIL 2011 TO THE PROSPECTUS DATED 3 NOVEMBER 2010


                               BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                                     (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                         (acting through its head office or its Madeira Free Trade Zone branch
                                   or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch)
                                                          and
                                             BES Finance Ltd.
                              (incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands)
                               unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by
                               BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                                    (incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                                          (acting through its London branch)



                   €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme
This Supplement (the "Supplement") to the Prospectus (the "Prospectus") dated 3 November 2010 (as
supplemented by supplements dated 15 November 2010 and 3 March 2011) constitutes a supplement to the
base prospectus for the purposes of article 13 of Part II of the Luxembourg Act dated 10 July 2005 relating to
prospectuses for securities (the "Prospectus Act") and is prepared in connection with the €20,000,000,000
Euro Medium Term Note Programme (the "Programme") established by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the
"Bank" or "BES") and BES Finance Ltd. ("BES Finance"). Terms defined in the Prospectus have the same
meaning when used in this Supplement.

This Supplement is supplemental to, and should be read in conjunction with, the Prospectus issued by the
Bank and BES Finance.

The purpose of this Supplement is to provide information regarding certain Recent Developments.

Each of the Bank and BES Finance accepts responsibility for the information contained in this Supplement.
To the best of the knowledge of each of the Bank and BES Finance (who have taken all reasonable care to
ensure that such is the case) the information contained in this Supplement is in accordance with the facts and
does not omit anything likely to affect the import of such information.

1.      Recent Developments

1.1     Ratings

        On 28 March 2011, BES announced that following the downgrade of the long term rating of the
        Portuguese Republic from A- to BBB, Standard & Poor's downgraded the ratings of Portuguese
        banks. Standard & Poor's Credit Market Services Europe Limited ("Standard & Poor's")
        downgraded the long and short term counterparty ratings of BES to BBB/A-3 from A-/A-2. The long
        term ratings remain on Credit Watch Negative while the short term ratings were removed from
        Credit Watch. At the same time Standard & Poor's lowered the ratings on BES hybrids from BBB- to
        BB.

        On 31 March 2011, BES announced that following the downgrade of the long term rating of the
        Portuguese Republic from BBB to BBB-, Standard & Poor's downgraded the ratings of Portuguese
        banks. Standard & Poor's downgraded the long-term counterparty rating of BES from BBB to BBB-.

                                                                                                            1
      The long term rating was removed from Credit Watch while the short term rating was affirmed at
      A3. The outlook remained negative.

      On 6 April 2011 BES announced that following the downgrade of the long term rating of the
      Portuguese Republic from A3 to Baa1, Moody's Investors Service España S.A. ("Moody's")
      downgraded the ratings of Portuguese banks. Moody's downgraded the long and short term debt
      ratings of BES to Baa2/Prime-2 from A2/Prime-1, with Credit Watch Negative. The Bank Financial
      Strength Rating (BFSR) was downgraded from C- to D+.

      Standard & Poor's and Moody's are established in the European Union and have applied for
      registration under Regulation (EC) No. 1060/2009, although notifications of the corresponding
      registration decisions have not yet been provided by the relevant competent authority.

1.2   General Meeting of Shareholders

      On 31 March 2011 BES announced that a General Meeting of Shareholders had taken place on 31
      March 2011 with 80.06% of the total Share Capital represented.

      The shareholders resolved to:
      "(a)   Approve the appointment of Mr. Bruno Bernard Marie Joseph de Laage de Meux as Vice-
             Chairman of the Board of Directors, and Messrs. Jean-Yves José Hocher and António Bornia
             as members of the Board of Directors, made by cooptation on April 23rd, 2010, and the
             appointment as members of the Board of Directors of Messrs. Marc Olivier Tristan
             Oppenheim and Michel Jacques Mathieu, also made by cooptation, respectively on July
             23rd, 2010 and February 25th, 2011.

      (b)     Approve the Management Report, the Corporate Governance Report and the remaining
              individual reporting documents relative to fiscal year 2010 accounts.
      (c)     Approve the Consolidated Management Report, the consolidated accounts and the remaining
              consolidated reporting documents relative to fiscal year 2010 accounts.
      (d)     Approve the proposal for the allocation of 2010 net earnings of EUR 255,007,121.83 as
              follows:
              - for Legal Reserve Euro 26,000,000.00
              - for Dividend Distribution Euro 147,000,000.00
              - for Other Reserves Euro 82,997,121.83
      (e)     Approve an expression of praise and a vote of confidence in BES’ management and
              supervision, as well as each of their respective members.
      (f)    Approve the Remuneration Committee and Board of Directors’ statements on the
             remuneration policy of BES’ corporate and supervision bodies and remaining BES
             managers, respectively.
      (g)    Approve a proposal for acquisition and sale of own shares and bonds, by BES or companies
             under BES’ control.
      (h)    Approve the partial amendment of the articles of association, namely the amendment of
             Article 14 and Article 16 (1 and 5).
      (i)    Approve the partial amendment of the General Meeting Regulation, namely the amendment
             of Article 4, Article 5, Article 10, Article 13 and Article 14 .
      (j)     Approve the authorisation to exercise competing activities."

                                                                                                   2
Copies of this Supplement can be obtained from the registered office of the Bank and of BES Finance and
from the specified office of the Paying Agent for the time being in Luxembourg.

In addition, copies of this Supplement are available for viewing at the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s
website (www.bourse.lu).

To the extent that there is any inconsistency between (a) any statement in this Supplement or any statement
incorporated by reference into the Prospectus by this Supplement and (b) any other statement in or
incorporated by reference in the Prospectus, the statements in (a) above will prevail.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement, there has been no significant change in the financial or trading position
of the Bank and the Group since 31 December 2010.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement, there has been no significant change in the financial or trading position
of BES Finance since 30 June 2010.

There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of BES Finance, of the Bank or the Group since
31 December, 2009.

Save as disclosed in this Supplement and any other supplements to the Prospectus, there has been no
significant new factor, material mistake or inaccuracy relating to information included in the Prospectus
since the publication of the Prospectus.

In accordance with article 13 paragraph 2 of Part II of the Prospectus Act, investors who, before this
supplement is published, have already agreed to purchase or subscribe for any Notes to be issued under the
Programme, have the right, exercisable within a time limit of two working days after the publication of this
supplement, to withdraw their acceptances.

Dated 19 April 2011




                                                                                                             3
