                                                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template




                                         This is the AOM of a contribution whose Version of Record has been
                                                              published and is available at
arXiv:2401.14511v1 [cs.AI] 25 Jan 2024

                                                         Artificial Intelligence and Law (2023)
                                                      https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-023-09376-5




                                                                         1
                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


2    Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)




    Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion
              to Act using s(LAW)

             Joaquín Arias      Mar Moreno-Rebato
         Jose A. Rodriguez-García     Sascha Ossowski
    CETINIA, Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Madrid, 28933, Spain.




                                    Abstract
     Automated legal reasoning and its application in smart contracts and
     automated decisions are increasingly attracting interest. In this context,
     ethical and legal concerns make it necessary for automated reasoners
     to justify in human-understandable terms the advice given. Logic Pro-
     gramming, specially Answer Set Programming, has a rich semantics
     and has been used to very concisely express complex knowledge. How-
     ever, modelling discretionality to act and other vague concepts such as
     ambiguity cannot be expressed in top-down execution models based on
     Prolog, and in bottom-up execution models based on ASP the justifica-
     tions are incomplete and/or not scalable. We propose to use s(CASP), a
     top-down execution model for predicate ASP, to model vague concepts
     following a set of patterns. We have implemented a framework, called
     s(LAW), to model, reason, and justify the applicable legislation and val-
     idate it by translating (and benchmarking) a representative use case, the
     criteria for the admission of students in the “Comunidad de Madrid”.

     Keywords: Answer Set Programming, Goal-Directed, Ambiguity,
     Administrative Discretion.

This work has been supported by grant VAE: TED2021-131295B-C33 funded by
MCIN/AEI/ 10.13039/501100011033 and by the “European Union NextGenera-
tionEU/PRTR”, by grant COSASS: PID2021-123673OB-C32 funded by MCIN/AEI/
10.13039/501100011033 and by “ERDF A way of making Europe”, and by grant
2023/00004/004 s(LAW) funded by URJC.
                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


      Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)            3

1 Introduction
The formal representation of legal texts to automatize reasoning about them
is well known in literature. For deterministic rules there are several proposals,
often based on logic programming languages (Ramakrishna et al, 2016; Ser-
got et al, 1986). This topic is recently gaining much attention thanks to the
interest in the so-called smart contracts, and to automated decisions by public
administrations (Cerrillo i Martínez, 2020; Cobbe, 2019; Huergo Lora, 2020;
Suksi, 2021; Vestri, 2021).
    Law uses a natural language that is characterized by its vagueness,
ambiguity, and open texture (which admits both restrictive and extensive
interpretations), i.e., there are areas of certainty and areas of uncertainty.
This contrasts with other scientific disciplines built on the use of symbolic
or mathematical languages. Modeling legal rules with computer languages is,
therefore, a complex task, since indeterminate legal concepts, discretionary
powers, general principles of law, etc., need to be formally represented. Per-
haps counterintuitively, even in the case of regulated procedures the formal
modeling of legal rules may raise multiple problems, because in most cases
it will be necessary to interpret the legal rule (specifying indeterminate legal
concepts, applying general principles of law, connecting some legal rules with
others, etc.). The modeling of legal rules in procedures in which discretionary
powers are articulated, increases this complexity significantly. To meet the
challenge of automating administrative procedures, it is necessary to duly
represent the aforementioned concepts pertinent to legal language within a
computer-interpretable formal language.
    However, existing proposals usually fall short in adequately capturing the
ambiguity and/or administrative discretion present in applicable legislation.
A good example is force majeure. Force majeure is a law term that must be
understood as referring to abnormal and unforeseeable circumstances which
were outside the control of the party by whom it is pleaded and the conse-
quences of which could not have been avoided in spite of the exercise of all due
care (see judgment Court of Justice of European Union, case Tomas Vilkas, C-
640/15, 25 January 2017). Consider, for instance, the awarding school places
in centers supported with public funds in the “Comunidad de Madrid” (CM),
in Spain. In the corresponding legal procedure, the proximity of a school to
a family’s home or work address plays an important role. This proximity is
determined based on existing educational districts, except in cases of force
majeure, but these cases are not defined a priory. Educational districts which
in the current regulations of the Community of Madrid is the municipality as
a whole or each of the city districts in the municipality of Madrid.
    In this work we present a framework, called s(LAW), that allows for mod-
eling legal rules involving ambiguity, and supports reasoning and inferring
conclusions based on them. Additionally, thanks to the goal-directed execution
of s(CASP), the underlying system used to implement our proposal, s(LAW)
provides justification of the resulting conclusions (in natural language).
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


4       Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

    To evaluate the expressiveness of our proposal we have represented the cri-
teria for the admission of students in the “Comunidad de Madrid” in s(LAW).
In particular we focus on the procedure for awarding school places for the “Edu-
cación Secundaria Obligatoria” (ESO) of centers supported with public funds
in the CM. The Spanish Organic Law on Education1 regulates, in article 84, the
criteria for the admission of students in public centers and private subsidized
centers and, in its second paragraph of this article 84, indicates adjudication
criteria. However, since Spain is a politically decentralized country, it is the
autonomous communities (and, therefore, their educational administrations)
that have powers to develop these aspects of basic state legislation. The CM,
in use of its powers in educational matters, establishes the framework and gen-
eral procedure for the admission of students to educational centers supported
with public funds for the ESO.2
    The case presented in this paper is, therefore, real case, based on the
regulations currently in force.
    The present article is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a brief
description of the field of goal-directed Answer Set Programming that the
s(LAW) framework sets out from. Section 3 analyses the legal basis of Discre-
tion to Act using Spanish legislation as an example. In section 4 we show how
Discretion to Act, and other relevant concepts, can be modelled withing the
s(LAW) automated reasoner, using the awarding of school places for the ESO
as a running example. In Section 5 we describe how s(LAW) can generate nat-
ural language explanations for its conclusions drawn from legal reasoning with
Discretion to Act. Section 6 discusses related work while in Section 7 we point
to future lines of work.

2 Goal-Directed Answer Set Programming
Our proposal relies on Answer Set Programming (ASP) (Gelfond and Lifs-
chitz, 1988) for coding legal rules. More specifically, we use s(CASP) (Arias
et al, 2018), a goal-directed implementation of ASP that features predicates,
constraints among non-ground variables, and uninterpreted functions.
    The top-down query-driven execution strategy of s(CASP) has three major
advantages w.r.t. traditional ASP system: (a) it does not require to ground
the programs; (b) its execution starts with a query and the evaluation only
explores the parts of the knowledge base relevant to the query; and (c) s(CASP)

    1
    Organic Law 2/2006, May 3, last modified by Organic Law 3/2020, December 29
    2
    Decree 29/2013, of 11 April, amended by Decree 244/2021, of 29 December, of the “Consejo
de Gobierno”, on freedom of choice of school in the “Comunidad de Madrid” and updating the
admission criteria and their weighting; Order 1240/2013, of 17 April, of the “Departamento de
Educación, Juventud y Deportes” of the “Comunidad de Madrid”, amended by Order 1534/2019,
of May 17 and by Order 592/2022, of 18 March, of the “Consejería de Educación e Investigación”
of the “Comunidad de Madrid”; Resolution of July 31, 2013, of the “Dirección General para la
Mejora de la Calidad de la Educación” (in relation to bilingual education); and Joint Resolution
of the “Viceconsejería de política educativa” and “Viceconsejería organización educativa” by which
instructions are issued to carry out the actions prior to the process of admission of students in
centers supported with public funds for the 2022/2023 academic year, of November 25, 2022.
(https://www.comunidad.madrid/sites/default/files/doc/educacion/
resolucion_conjunta_admision_regimen_general_2023-2024_.pdf).
                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


      Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)             5

returns partial stable models (the relevant subsets of the ASP stable models
needed to support the query) and their corresponding justification (proof tree).
Thus, our proposal automates commonsense reasoning and is scalable whereas
ground-based ASP systems do not (Section 6).
   Additionally, s(CASP) provides a mechanism to present justifications in
natural language using a generic translation, and the possibility of customizing
them with directives that provide explanation patterns in natural language.
Both plain text and user-friendly, expandable HTML can be generated. These
patterns can be used with the program text itself, thereby making it easier for
experts without a programming background to understand both the program
and the results, i.e., partial model and justification, of its execution.

3 Legal Basis for the Discretion to Act
This section presents the first main contribution of this work, the analysis of
the administrative and political discretion to act. In addition, we explain the
limitation for automated application of the discretion to act and propose a
framework that would facilitate the application of discretion to act.

3.1 Political Discretion and Administrative Discretion
This section gives a brief explanation of when political and/or administrative
discretion to act occurs and some examples.

3.1.1 Political Discretion
Political discretionality occurs when, either explicitly or implicitly, political
bodies or authorities at the highest political level (governments, ministers,
mayors, etc.) or senior officials of the Administration are granted a margin of
decision making of their own, choosing between different possible alternatives.
In reality, this is politics, the ability to choose in order to pursue the general
interest.
    This type of discretion is considered a type of strong, or maximum, dis-
cretion, inherent to the political responsibility of the person exercising it.
Examples of this type of discretion would be, for example, regulatory norms,
the implementation of a public service, the decision to connect two cities by
train, the adoption of health measures in a pandemic (requirement or not of a
passport, curfew, restrictions on mobility or on the hotel industry, etc.).

3.1.2 Administrative Discretion
Concept
Administrative discretionality (Garcia de Enterría, 1962; Garcia de Enter-
ría and Fernández, 2020; Sánchez Morón, 2021; Cosculluela Montaner, 2021;
Otenyo, 2016) implies a margin of free choice attributed by a rule to a Pub-
lic Administration and, within this, to an administrative body. Discretionality
implies being able to introduce subjective criteria of valuation, to choose
                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


6     Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

between different alternatives, provided that these are equally lawful. Discre-
tion may refer to the convenience of acting or not, to the manner of acting, or
to the content of the action.
    Administrative discretion has been contemplated by Huber (1953) as the
“Trojan horse of the rule of law”. Much theorizing has been done in public law
and has emphasized the need to reduce discretionality as much as possible and
to fight against the immunities of power, focusing on the scope of its judicial
control.

Distinction with respect to regulated acts
An administrative act is a statement issued by a Public Administration and
subject to Administrative Law. There are administrative acts that are issued
in the exercise of regulated powers and others that are issued in the exercise
of discretionary powers.
    An administrative act is regulated when the Public Administration cannot
introduce any subjective criteria of assessment, i.e., it must simply limit itself
to applying the law. Examples from the Spanish administration are three-year
terms granted to a civil servant, five-year teaching periods (at the Spanish
Universities), or an urban planning license. Let’s consider the urban planning
license, which is a regulated but complex procedure. Verifying whether a license
application complies with all requirements of urban planning and other urban
planning regulations is not a simple task, as the applicable legal rules will
require a complex legal interpretation. Once the requirements have been met,
the Administration – in this case the City Council – must limit itself to granting
the license, i.e., it cannot introduce additional requirements or rule out projects
that, for example, it dislikes from a political point of view.
    On the other hand, there are discretionary acts, i.e., acts that are issued
in the exercise of discretionary powers. In these acts, the Public Administra-
tion does not limit itself to automatically apply the law. When the Public
Administration exercises a discretionary power, it can choose between differ-
ent alternatives, provided that these are equally valid from the perspective
of the Law. Otherwise, it would incur in an arbitrary activity, and arbitrari-
ness is prohibited for public authorities and, therefore, also for the Public
Administration (see, for instance, article 9.3. of the “Constitución Española”).

Technical discretion
Technical discretion is a subtype of administrative discretion. In this case,
the possibility of choosing between different alternatives is limited by the
applicable scientific or technical knowledge. Examples would be the academic
qualification of an examination or the declaration of ruin of a building on the
basis of a technical study. Sometimes it is attributed to collegiate bodies, as
may be the case of the evaluation commissions in a competitive process to
award teaching positions or research projects.
                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


      Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)             7

3.2 Applying discretion to act
An administrative procedure is a set of acts that prepare and enable the last
act of the procedure, which is generally a resolution, such as, the granting or
refusal of an aid, a subsidy, a research project, a town planning license, or the
obligation to pay a fine/tax.
    The administrative procedure may be completely regulated, e.g., (i) an
application for admission to a public university submitted by someone who
meets all requirements and provides the required documentation, or (ii) the
granting of an urban planning license, as explained above (although it may
seem a simple task, due to the interpretation of legal norms it generally is not).
    On the other hand, even for an administrative procedure in which discre-
tionary powers are exercised (those in which the Public Administration can
choose between different alternatives, as long as they are equally valid for the
Law), discretion is never absolute but subject to legal limits. In every admin-
istrative procedure there is always a part (and it is a qualitatively important
part) that regulates the action of the Public Administration. Among others,
the legal rule always indicates the administrative body that has to exercise
that power, the procedure to be followed to adopt the decision, the purpose
pursued with the same and the requirements demanded and the verification
of the “determining facts” on which the decision is based before exercising the
discretion.
    As a consequence, an administrative procedure is either entirely regulated,
or there will be a regulated part with a small discretionary niche. For instance,
in a hypothetical administrative procedure for awarding places in public resi-
dences for the elderly, 90 percent of the points to be awarded to the different
candidates would be regulated and determined by the income level of the can-
didates and their socio-health conditions, but remaining 10 percent of points
might be awarded by a multidisciplinary team based on criteria that its mem-
bers would agree upon. Another example is the awarding of school places
discussed in the paper. It refers to regulated requirements, with the exception
of the small discretionary score that can be awarded by the centers.

3.3 Judicial control/review
The most interesting aspect of the discretion to act is its judicial control
(Sourdin (2021)).
    As we have explained above, discretion means choosing between different
alternatives (A, B, C, D...) as long as they are equally valid for the law; that
is, as long as they are not arbitrary, discriminatory or illegal because they go
against legal norms.
    For example, in the context of our running use case, procedure for awarding
school places in publicly funded centers:
• Schools may award points for having siblings in the school, or because the
  parents have been former students, or because the mother has been a victim
  of gender-based violence and resides near the school,
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


8     Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

• but not for belonging to one religion or another, for being of a certain gender,
  or for having a high IQ.
   This configuration of discretion determines that judges cannot enter into
judgment on the merits of the discretionary decision. They may supervise the
regulated part of the procedure and other elements described below:
• may audit the body exercising jurisdiction,
• whether the procedure has been followed,
• whether the public purpose pursued by the rule has been fulfilled,
• whether the indeterminate legal concepts (those that cannot be configured
  a priori and that, case by case, must be analyzed whether or not they are
  present, such as “force majeure”) have been correctly applied,
• whether the general principles of law have been respected, such as equality,
  legal certainty, proportionality...,
• of course, also whether the requirements and the “determining facts” have
  been correctly applied: Did the family really live near the school? Was it a
  large family or a single parent family?
    However, once all this has been checked, the judge will not be able to assess
why, out of all the options, A, B, C, D... has been chosen. This is so because,
as we mentioned before, it is a matter of choosing between alternatives that
are equally valid for the law and, therefore, are not subject to judicial review.
    On the other hand, technical discretion is also reviewable. A judicial review
can also be undertaken if a technical error committed is proven by evidence.
    The decisions of a collegial body exercising technical discretion (a commis-
sion composed of technical experts, for example, an evaluation commission for
the awarding of teaching positions or research projects) are presumed to be
correct, unless a serious and manifest error (arbitrariness) is demonstrated.
    Finally, judicial control of political discretion is limited, since it is a political
decision and therefore subjective. However, it will not be exempt from legal
control in terms of legal compliance, in particular, respect for human rights.

3.4 Automate (or not) the discretion to act
The automation of administrative decisions, even if they are regulated, is not
an easy task because a huge part of relevant evidence is not directly deducible
in the available facts (with some exceptions, e.g., when it comes to computing
five years of active service to recognize a five-year teaching period in Span-
ish Universities). Most of the procedures require an interpretation of the legal
rules in order to be applied, even if only regulated powers are exercised. In
Spain there is a doctrinal majority (for the moment) that does not admit
the use of fully automated decisions (without human intervention) when dis-
cretionary powers are exercised. Other legal systems that do not admit it at
all (Moreno Rebato, 2021; Perry, 2017; Huggins, 2021).
                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


      Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)             9

    By consequence, there will be administrative procedures that can be 100%
automated and others that can be partially automated and open a range of
options (discretionary aspects).
    In this paper we propose a framework that automates the verification of
the regulated issues but also offers (duly justified) the different legal options
among which the competent body can apply discretion.
    In particular, with regard to the example of the allocation of school places
discussed in the next Section, the discretionary part is attributed to the educa-
tional centers, which are administrative management bodies without political
relevance.

4 s(LAW): A Legal Reasoner
In this section we present the other two contributions of the work: (i) a set of
patterns to translate legal rules into ASP, and to generate readable justifica-
tions in natural language, and (ii) a framework for modeling, reasoning, and
justifying conclusions based on the evidence provided by the user and the appli-
cable law, representing discretion, ambiguity and/or incomplete information
(key concepts in legal cases).

4.1 Running example
Let us consider the following use case to explain the set of patterns and the
framework we are proposing.
    As we mentioned before, the first case to be modeled in this paper refers
to the allocation of school places. Although there is freedom of choice of edu-
cational center, when the number of applications for a given center is greater
than the number of places, the regulations establish ordering criteria to assign
points, such as the priority and complementary criteria:
• Among the priority criteria are the fact of having siblings enrolled in the
  same center, the proximity of the family home or place of work of the parents
  or legal guardians of the student, and the income of the family unit (if
  they are beneficiaries of a minimum living income or a minimum insertion
  income).
• On the other hand, complementary criteria comprise facts like belonging to
  a large or single-parent family, parents working at the center, the existence
  of a disability of the student, being a victim of gender violence or terrorism,
  and parents who have been former students of the center.
    Within these criteria, a small discretionary margin is attributed for each
center to award points for “other circumstances” that may be established by
each center, which may coincide with any of the above or which may be decided
at the discretion of each center. A series of tie-breaking criteria are also spec-
ified. This information is not known because it is not known whether or not
there are ties. Once this information is known, it is resolved by drawing lots.
                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


10      Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

Finally, it is established that in “specific cases” that are necessary to meet edu-
cational needs, the number of groups and school units may be increased, e.g.,
a case of “force majeure” (a meteorological catastrophe that makes it impos-
sible to open or use a certain center) and, all this, because always and in any
case, the schooling of all students must be guaranteed (even if it is a different
center than the one initially chosen).
    It is, therefore, a fairly regulated procedure, in which only a small
percentage of points are at the discretion of the school.

4.2 Patterns to translate law into ASP
The translation of legal rules into logic predicates has been considered a
straightforward task for many years. However, the translation of ambiguity
and/or discretion concepts required the help of an expert in law and/or in the
field of application, in order to specify only one interpretation and/or decision.
    Let us use the encoding of the procedure for the adjudication of school
places in the CM (Fig. 1) to explain the following patterns:

Requirement For Applying
These are the most common constructions in legal articles, and we consider
two main patterns:
• Disjunction of requirements, e.g., “s/he obtains a school place if one of the
  following common requirements are met”. This is expressed by separating
  each requirement in different clauses, see Fig. 1 lines 9, 12, and 19:
• Conjunction of requirements, e.g., “In addition, some of the specific require-
  ments must be met”, which is translated into a single clause where the comma
  ',' means and, see Fig. 1 lines 5-7:

Exceptions For Applying
As we mentioned before, a legal article is, in general, a default rule subject to
possible exceptions. In s(CASP) the exceptions can be encoded using negation
as failure. For example, Fig. 1 lines 2-4 shows the translation of “It will be
possible to obtain a school place if the requirement is met and there is no
exception” and then, the compiler of s(CASP) would generate its dual, i.e.,
not exception, by collecting and checking that no exceptions hold:
1    not exception :- not exception_1, . . ., not exception_n.
where not exception_i is a new predicate name that identified the dual of
the ith exception. For the sake of brevity let us omit the explanation of how
the compiler generates the dual for each exception (see (Marple et al, 2017;
Arias et al, 2018) for details). Fig. 1 lines 46-57 shows the translation of the
unique exception defined in our running example: “Students coming from non-
bilingual public schools, who apply for a place in English language bilingual
schools and who wish to study in the Bilingual Section, need to accredit a
                      Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


       Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)             11



1    %% Obtain a school place if...         45   %% Exceptions:
2    obtain_place(St) :-                    46   exception(St) :-
3      met_requirement(St),                 47     come_non_bilingual(St),
4      not exception(St).                   48     want_bilingual_section(St,Course),
5    met_requirement(St) :-                 49     not accredit_english(St,Course).
6      met_common_requirement(St),          50   accredit_english(St,'1st ESO') :-
7      met_specific_requirement(St).        51     b1_certificate(St).
8    %% Common requirements:                52   accredit_english(St,'2nd ESO') :-
9    met_common_requirement(St) :-          53     b1_certificate(St).
10     large_family(St).                    54   accredit_english(St,'3rd ESO') :-
11                                          55     b2_certificate(St).
12   met_common_requirement(St) :-          56   accredit_english(St,'4th ESO') :-
13     recipient_social_benefits(St).       57     b2_certificate(St).
14   recipient_social_benefits(St) :-       58   %% Discretion To Act:
15     renta_minima_insercion(St).          59   obtain_place(St) :-
16   recipient_social_benefits(St) :-       60     not met_requirement(St),
17     ingreso_minimo_vital(St).            61     met_complement_criterion(St,CC).
18                                          62   obtain_place(St) :-
19   met_common_requirement(St) :-          63     met_requirement(St), exception(St),
20     disability_status(St).               64     met_complement_criterion(St,CC).
21   disability_status(St) :-               65

22     disabled_parent(St).                 66   met_complement_criterion(St,CC) :-
23   disability_status(St) :-               67     school_criteria(St,CC),
24     disabled_sibling(St).                68     purpose(CC), not unlawful(CC),
25   %% Specific requirements:              69     not n_met_complement_criterion(St,CC).
26   met_specific_requirement(St) :-        70   n_met_complement_criterion(St,CC) :-
27     sibling_enroll_center(St).           71     not met_complement_criterion(St,CC).
28   met_specific_requirement(St) :-        72   purpose(CC) :-
29     legal_guardian_work_center(St).      73     promote_diversity(CC).
30                                          74   unlawful(CC) :-
31   met_specific_requirement(St) :-        75     sex_discrimination(CC).
32     relative_former_student(St).         76   unlawful(CC) :-
33                                          77     race_discrimination(CC).
34   met_specific_requirement(St) :-        78   unlawful(CC) :-
35     school_proximity(St).                79     religion_discrimination(CC).
36   school_proximity(St) :-                80

37     same_education_district(St).         81   promote_diversity(foreign_student).
38   school_proximity(St) :-                82   promote_diversity(specific_etnia).
39     not same_education_district(St),     83   race_discrimination(specific_etnia).
40     force_majeure.    % Ambiguity        84

41   force_majeure :-                       85   school_criteria(St,foreign_student) :-
42     not n_force_majeure.                 86     foreign_student(St).
43   n_force_majeure :-                     87   school_criteria(St,specific_etnia) :-
44     not force_majeure.                   88     specific_etnia(St).

Fig. 1 Translation of the procedure for awarding school places under s(LAW).
                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


12     Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

level of English in the four skills equivalent to level B1 for 1st /2nd ESO, and
to level B2 for 3rd /4th ESO”.

Ambiguity
Ambiguity occurs when some aspects of the law can be interpreted in differ-
ent ways. For example, “proximity to the family or work address” is a specific
and defined requirement based on the distribution by educational districts.
However, in case of force majeure, students from an education district may
be reassigned to a school from another district. Fig. 1 lines 34-44 encode
this scenario allowing evaluation without having to determine a priori the
force majeure circumstances necessary to justify the reassignment of students.
This pattern generates a model where force_majeure is assumed to hold and
another model where there is no evidence that force_majeure holds.

Discretion To Act
Discretion to act introduces the possibility of choosing between different
options that we intend to model by generating multiple models. Implementa-
tions based on Prolog compute a single, canonical model, and therefore, bypass
this nondeterminism by selecting one interpretation. The discretion to act can
be considered as a ground or an exception following the previous patterns. For
example, Fig. 1 lines 59-79 shows the translation of the discretion to act rule:
“The School Council may add another complementary criterion”. The result-
ing encoding uses predicates in which the variable CC can be instantiated with
different values. This feature allows us to reuse some of the clauses without
repeating them, i.e., the clauses in lines 59-79 are generic, while clauses 81-88
specify the ground and exceptions of the criteria added by a particular school.
Clauses in lines 66-71 generate two possible models if the discretion to act is
exercised according to the purpose / intention of the law and it is not unlaw-
ful. In one model the complementary criterion is applied and in the other it
does not. Then, clauses in lines 86-88 state the cases in which the discretion
to act has a purpose and/or is unlawful.

Unknown Information
The use of default negation may introduce unexpected results in the absence of
information (positive and/or negative). Therefore, in many cases the desirable
behavior should capture the absence of information by generating differ-
ent models depending on the relevant information. For example, it may be
unclear whether the documents we have to certify that we are a large_family
are valid or not, so we avoid introducing that information and the rea-
soner would reason assuming both scenarios. To state that some information
is certain we would use the predicate evidence/2, e.g., evidence(st01,
large_family) means that student 1 has the condition of large family.
Additionally, s(LAW) would provide strong negation, denoted with '-', to
specify that we have evidences supporting the falsehood of some information,
                          Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


         Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)                13

    1    #include('ArticleESO.pl').              10   evidence(st01, sibling_enroll_center).
    2    #include('ArticleESO.pred.pl').         11   evidence(st01, same_education_district).
    3                                            12   evidence(st01, b1_certificate).
    4    come_non_bilingual(St).                 13   -evidence(st01, foreign_student).
    5    want_bilingual_section(St,'2nd ESO').   14   -evidence(st01, specific_etnia).
    6                                            15

    7    student(st01).                          16   student(st02).
    8    evidence(st01, large_family).           17   ...
    9    evidence(st01, renta_minima_insercion).
Fig. 2 First lines of the file students.pl.


e.g., -evidence(st04,large_family) means that student 4 does not have the
condition of large family.

4.3 Description of s(LAW)
s(LAW), built on top of s(CASP), is composed by three modules: the first
contains the articles, the second contains explanations to generate readable
justifications, and the third one contains evidence from a set of students. In
our running example:

ArticleESO.pl
Contains the legislation rules in Fig. 1 following the patterns described in
Section 4.2.

ArticleESO.pre.pl
Contains the natural language patterns for the predicates that are relevant
to provide readable justifications of the conclusions inferred by s(LAW). The
directive #pred defines the natural language patterns, e.g.:
1       #pred obtain_place(St) :: '@(St) may obtain a school place'.
Note that the natural language pattern is customized based on the id of the
student, @(St).
   Additionally, to facilitate the understanding of the code we can obtain a
readable code (in natural language) by invoking scasp --code --human.

Students.pl
    Fig. 2 shows the encoding of the module students.pl corresponding to a
set of 6 student. This last module encodes the evidence of 6 students and links
them with the previous modules ArticleESO.pl and ArticleESO.pred.pl
(lines 1-2). The predicates evidence/2 and -evidence/2 (explained in
Section 4.2) are used to specify the known information, second argu-
ment, (positive or negative evidences) for each student, first argument.
For the sake of brevity, let us handle as unknown evidence corresponding
to: large_family, renta_minima_insercion, sibling_enroll_center,
same_education_district, b1_certificate, foreign_student, and
                             Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


14           Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)
Table 1 Case of different students evaluated using s(LAW).
Note: ‘+’ is a positive evidence, ‘−’ is a negative evidence, ‘?’ means unkown.

                                                st01   st02    st03   st04    st05   st06

              large_family                       +      +       +       −      −       −
              renta_minima_insercion             +      +       +       ?      −       −

              sibling_enroll_center              +      +       −      +       −       −
              same_education_district            +      +       −      +       −       −

              b1_certificate                     +       −      +       ?      −       −

              foreign_student                    −       −      −       −      +      −
              specific_etnia                     −       −      −       −      −      +

              ?- obtain_place(stXX)             yes     no     yes     yes    yes     no


specific_etnia. Fig. 2 lines 7-14 provide the known information correspond-
ing to the first student. Note that we consider that all students, coming from
non-bilingual public schools, apply for a place in English language bilingual
schools and wish to study in the Bilingual Section (Fig. 2 lines 4-5).

5 Explainable Reasoning
The modules of s(LAW) are implemented under s(CASP) version 0.22.12.14
(https://gitlab.software.imdea.org/ciao-lang/sCASP), that runs under Ciao
Prolog version 1.19-480. (http://ciao-lang.org/). The benchmarks used in this
section are available at http://platon.etsii.urjc.es/~jarias/papers/slaw-ailaw23
and were run on a MacOS 13.2.1 laptop with an Apple Core M2.
    A priori Deduction: Consider we run our reasoner s(LAW) in the
interactive mode to reason about the six students by invoking:
1       scasp -i --tree --human --short --pos students.pl
   Then, we launch the queries to obtain conclusions from the reasoner.
Table 1 shows the data corresponding to the candidates and the conclusion
generated by s(LAW) for the query ?- obtain_place(St). Students 1, 3, 4,
and 5 may obtain a place at the school3 while students 2 and 6 do not:
• Student 1: Fig. 2 contains the information corresponding to this student.
  Since s/he meets common and specific requirements and avoids the exception
  (having level b1 in English), the evaluation returns the partial model:
    { obtain_place(st01), large_family(st01), sibling_enroll_center(st01),
      come_non_bilingual(st01), want_bilingual_section(st01,2nd ESO),
      b1_certificate(st01) }
    and the corresponding justification shown in Fig. 3.

    3
        We discuss later on that under different assumptions students 3 and 4 do not obtain a place.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


       Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)              15

1    st01 may obtain a school place, because
2        a common requirement is met, because
3            st01 is part of a large family.
4        a specific requirement is met, because
5            st01 has siblings enrolled in the center.
6        there is no evidence that an exception applies, because
7            st01 came from a non-bilingual public school, and
8            st01 came from a non-bilingual public school, justified above, and
9            st01 wish to study 2nd ESO in the Bilingual Section, and
10           st01 accredit required level of English for 2nd ESO, because
11               in the four skills certificate level b1.
Fig. 3 Justification in Natural Language for the query ?- obtain_place(st01).



1    st03 may obtain a school place, because
2        a common requirement is met, because
3            st03 is part of a large family.
4        a specific requirement is met, because
5            the school is near the family or work, because
6                'force_majeure' holds, because
7                    it is assumed that 'force_majeure' holds.
8        there is no evidence that an exception applies, because
9            st03 came from a non-bilingual public school, and
10           st03 came from a non-bilingual public school, justified above, and
11           st03 wish to study 2nd ESO in the Bilingual Section, and
12           st03 accredit required level of English for 2nd ESO, because
13               in the four skills certificate level b1.
Fig. 4 Justification in Natural Language for the query ?- obtain_place(st03).


• Student 2: meets common and specific requirements but has to be rejected
  because s/he does not accredit level b1 in English (in Table 1 that is identi-
  fied with a ‘−’ in the corresponding column/row). Therefore, for the query
  obtain_place(st02) s(LAW) returns no model.
• Student 3: meets common requirements and avoids the exception. But
  s/he does not meet any specific requirement (sibling_enroll_center
  or same_education_district). Nevertheless, by assuming force_majeure
  s/he also meets a specific requirement school_proximity, so s(CASP)
  returns the partial model:
     { obtain_place(st03), large_family(st03), school_proximity(st03),
       force_majeure, come_non_bilingual(st03),
       want_bilingual_section(st03,2nd ESO), b1_certificate(st03) }
  and we see in the corresponding justification (see Fig. 4) that
  school_proximity holds by assuming force_majeure.
• Student 4: in this use-case there is absence of information regarding the
  “renta minima de insercion” (renta_minima_insercion) and the English
  certificate (b1_certificate), which are marked with ? in Table 1. The
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


16       Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

1    st05 may obtain a school place, because
2        the criterion foreign_student is met, because
3            st05 meets the criteria foreign_student, because
4                st05 is a foreign student.
5            foreign_student follows the purpose of the procedure, because
6                foreign_student promotes the diversity.
7            it is assumed that the criterion foreign_student is met.
Fig. 5 Justification in Natural Language for the query ?- obtain_place(st05).


    partial model returned assumes that the truth values for these pieces of
    information are true:
    { obtain_place(st04), renta_minima_insercion(st04),
      sibling_enroll_center(st04), not exception(st04), come_non_bilingual(st04),
      want_bilingual_section(st04,2nd ESO), b1_certificate(st04) }
  therefore, based on that assumption the student would obtain a place.
• Student 5: now let’s consider that there is a school with a complementary
  criterion for foreign students and therefore, since the student is a foreigner,
  s/he obtains a place. Fig. 5 shows the justification for this example.
• Student 6: now we consider that the complementary criterion is for student
  of a specific etnia, and that student 6 belongs to this ethnic group. However,
  this criterion, specific_etnia, cannot be applied because it discriminates
  by race and, thus, is unlawful. Therefore, no model is returned, and the
  student does not obtain a place.
   A posteriori Deduction: The main advantage of s(LAW) is its ability to
generate justifications not only for positive but also for negative information.
To extract a justification including the negated literals we include the flag
--neg in the invocation:
1    scasp -i --tree --human --short --neg students.pl
   This ability would allow us to analyze the reason for a specific inference
and/or to determine which are the requirements needed to obtain a specific
conclusion:
• For student 2, the query ?- not obtain_place returns a partial model and
  the justification (see Fig. 6) supporting that the student does not obtain
  a place. While student 2 met a common and a specific requirement, s/he
  does not accredit the required level of English and s/he does not meet any
  complementary criterion. Note that the last check is done for every possible
  complementary criterion, i.e., by checking that there is no evidence for Var0
  not equal foreign_student, nor specific_etnia, and by checking that
  there is no evidence for both of them.
• For student 3, the query ?- not force_majeure, obtain_place(st03)
  avoids the assumption of force majeure and therefore, s(LAW) returns no
  model. Note that student 3 does not meet any specific requirement so while
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


       Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)                    17

1    there is no evidence that st02 may obtain a school place, because
2        a common requirement is met, because
3            st02 is part of a large family.
4        a specific requirement is met, because
5            st02 has siblings enrolled in the center.
6        an exception applies, because
7            st02 came from a non-bilingual public school, and
8            st02 wish to study 2nd ESO in the Bilingual Section, and
9            there is no evidence that st02 accredit required level of English for 2nd ESO, because
10               there is no evidence that in the four skills certificate level b1.
11       an exception applies, justified above, and
12       there is no evidence that the complementary criterion Var0 not equal foreign_student, nor
              ֒→ specific_etnia is met, because
13           there is no evidence that st02 meets the criteria Var0 not equal foreign_[. . . ]
14       there is no evidence that the complementary criterion foreign_student is met, because
15           there is no evidence that st02 meets the criteria foreign_student, because
16               there is no evidence that st02 is a foreign student.
17       there is no evidence that the complementary criterion specific_etnia is met, because
18           there is no evidence that st02 meets the criteria specific_etnia, because
19               there is no evidence that st02 belongs to a specific etnia.
Fig. 6 Justification in Natural Language for the query ?- not obtain_place(st02).



1    there is no evidence that st04 may obtain a school place, because
2        there is no evidence that a common requirement is met, because
3            there is no evidence that st04 is part of a large family, and
4            there is no evidence that st04 is a recipient of the RMI, because
5                it is assumed that there is no evidence that st04 is a recipient of the RMI.
6            there is no evidence that a parent or sibling of st04 has disability status.
7        there is no evidence that the complementary criterion Var0 not equal foreign_student, nor
              ֒→ specific_etnia is met, because
8            there is no evidence that st04 meets the criteria Var0 not equal foreign_[. . . ]
9        there is no evidence that the complementary criterion foreign_student is met, because
10           there is no evidence that st04 meets the criteria foreign_student, because
11               there is no evidence that st04 is a foreign student.
12       there is no evidence that the complementary criterion specific_etnia is met, because
13           there is no evidence that st04 meets the criteria specific_etnia, because
14               there is no evidence that st04 belongs to a specific etnia.
Fig. 7 Justification in Natural Language for the query ?- not obtain_place(st04).


  under the assumption of force_majeure s/he meets the specific require-
  ment for school_proximity, without that assumption s/he does not and
  therefore, s/he does not obtain a place.
• For student 4, the query ?- not obtain_place(st04) succeeds consid-
  ering the assumptions for which this student does not obtain a place.
  For example, Fig. 7 shows the justification where it is assumed that
  renta_minima_insercion does not holds.
                        Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


18       Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

1    there is no evidence that st06 may obtain a school place, because
2        there is no evidence that a common requirement is met, because
3            there is no evidence that st06 is part of a large family, and
4            there is no evidence that st06 is a recipient of the RMI, and
5            there is no evidence that a parent or sibling of st06 has disability status.
6        there is no evidence that the complementary criterion Var0 not equal foreign_student, nor
              ֒→ specific_etnia is met, because
7            there is no evidence that st06 meets the criteria Var0 not equal foreign_[. . . ]
8        there is no evidence that the complementary criterion foreign_student is met, because
9            there is no evidence that st06 meets the criteria foreign_student, because
10               there is no evidence that st06 is a foreign student.
11       there is no evidence that the complementary criterion specific_etnia is met, because
12           st06 meets the criteria specific_etnia, because
13               st06 belongs to a specific etnia.
14           specific_etnia follows the purpose of the procedure, because
15               specific_etnia promotes the diversity.
16           specific_etnia is illegal, because
17               specific_etnia discriminates based on race.
Fig. 8 Justification in Natural Language for the query ?- not obtain_place(st06).


• For student 6, Fig. 8 shows the justification of the query ?- not
  obtain_place(st06) so we can analyze more in detail why this student is
  rejected. While the complementary criteria for student 5 (foreign_student)
  is similar to specific_etnia, the justification tree shows that student 6 does
  not obtain a place because the complementary criterion specific_etnia is
  illegal due to race_discrimination, see Fig. 8 lines 16-17.
    Additionally, we can collect the partial models, in which the school place
is or is not obtained, together with their justification and analyze “Epistemic
Specifications” (Gelfond, 1994), that is, what is true in all/some models, which
partial models share certain assumptions, etc. This reasoning makes it possible
to detect the missing information that would change the decision from “not
obtained” (or “obtained” under some assumptions) to “obtained”. Note that, by
introducing the new evidence, the resulting justification of s(LAW) provides
an explanation in which these evidence are used to support the decision.

6 Related Work
In attempting to model how legal discretion is exercised, Schild and Zeleznikow
(2005) and Kannai et al (2007) discuss the notion of open texture, the notion of
delimitation of legal domains, and whether decisions made in a given domain
are binary. They propose to model discretionary decision-making using three
independent axes: bounded (B) and unbounded (U), defined (D) and undefined
(U), and binary (B) and continuous (C). The resulting classification makes it
possible to select the adequate inferencing techniques for each octant:
                     Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


     Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)              19

1. Bounded, Defined, Binary (BDB) All issues and rules are known, and
   the decision is binary. A rule-based approach can be use, e.g., to model
   the domain of driving offences where drivers can lose their licence by being
   drunk based on the blood alcohol level.
2. Bounded, Defined, Continuous (BDC) All issues and rules are known,
   but the decision is continuous. In these cases, it is necessary to define
   systems, such as the US Sentencing Guidelines, to alleviate sentencing
   disparities.
3. Bounded, Undefined, Binary (BUB) The issues are known and the
   decision is binary, but no knowledge is available about how they should
   be combined. Knowledge discovery, based on previous landmark cases, can
   be automated, However, machine learning techniques require such a large
   number of cases that it is rarely available in any legal domain.
4. Bounded, Undefined, Continuous (BUC) The task of distributing
   property following divorce is, in general, an example in which the relative
   importance of the different factors is not specified, and crucial terms are
   not defined. In this scenario of knowledge discovery, to alleviate disparities,
   continuous values are involved.
5. Unbounded, Defined, Binary (UDB) Only some issues and the way
   they combine are known and the decision is binary, e.g., determine if a
   driver is guilty under the drink-driving regulations based on the notion of
   dangerous driving.
6. Unbounded, Defined, Continuous (UDC) Determine the sentence of
   a guilty driver under the drink-driving regulations based on the notion of
   dangerous driving.
7. Unbounded, Undefined, Binary (UUB) Legal decision-makers in these
   domains exercise a great degree of discretion with a binary output, there-
   fore, each decision have a great impact, e.g., a refugee review decision has
   impact on both the applicant and relevant family.
8. Unbounded, Undefined, Continuous (UUC) Deciding on the resi-
   dence of the children of the marriage after divorce, in a legislation that tries
   to move away from the “all or nothing”, mitigates the risk of unfairness but
   requires a greater effort of consistency with previous judgments.
    Tasks in the octants 1 and 2 can be modeled using proposals based on logic
programming languages such as those by Ramakrishna et al (2016) and Sergot
et al (1986) using deterministic rules. To model unbounded and/or undefined
tasks, in octants 3-8, non-monotonic reasoning is needed, so we propose the
use of Answer Set Programming (ASP), a successful paradigm for developing
intelligent applications and has attracted much attention due to its expressive-
ness, ability to represent knowledge, incorporate non-monotonicity, and model
combinatorial problems. Most ASP systems follow bottom-up executions that
require a grounding phase where the variables of the program are replaced
with their possible values. During the grounding phase, links between vari-
ables are lost and therefore an explanation framework for these systems must
face many challenges to provide a concise justification of why a specific answer
                       Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


20       Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

set satisfies the rules (and which rules). The most relevant approaches are:
off-line and on-line justifications (Pontelli et al, 2009); Causal Graph Justifica-
tion (Cabalar et al, 2014); and Labeled ABA-Based Answer Set Justification
(LABAS) (Schulz and Toni, 2016). However, these approaches are applied
to grounded versions of the programs, i.e., non-ground programs have to be
grounded, and they may produce unwieldy justifications when the non-ground
program has uninterpreted functions, consults large databases and/or requires
the representation of dense domains (Arias et al, 2018).
    Note that while in the proposal presented in 2020 (Arias et al, 2021) the
implementation used a different file for each student, in the implementation
presented in this paper (see Section 4.3) the information for all students is
included in a unique file/database, Students.pl.
    On the other hand, systems that follow a top-down execution can trace
which rules have been used to obtain the answers more easily. One such system
is ErgoAI (https://coherentknowledge.com), based on XSB (Swift and Warren,
2012), that generates justification trees for programs with variables. ErgoAI
has been applied to analyze streams of financial regulatory and policy compli-
ance in near real-time providing explanations in English that are fully detailed
and interactively navigable. However, default negation in ErgoAI is based on
the well-founded semantics (Gelder et al, 1991) and therefore ErgoAI is not a
framework that allows the representation of ambiguity and/or discretion.
    Finally, we would like to emphasize that explainable AI techniques for
black-box AI tools, most of them based on machine learning, are not able
to explain how variation in the input data changes the resulting deci-
sion (DARPA, 2017).

7 Conclusions
The present work is an example for the fruitful collaboration of computer
scientists and lawyers in the context of legal knowledge engineering (Susskind,
2017). In principle, there are two major ways of translating, modeling and
applying legal rules by converting them into computer language. On the one
hand, it may be the law that is adjusted to computer languages, in which case
the role of the jurist would be to reformulate the legal rules, trying to reduce
indeterminate legal concepts, discretionality and other ambiguous elements,
approaching what is called computational law (Sergot et al, 1986; Genesereth,
2015; Ramakrishna et al, 2016; Liebwald, 2015; Branting, 2017). An example
is the translation of Rule 34 of the Legal Profession (Professional Conduct)
Rules 2015 of Singapore, which proceeds to amend the word “business” in the
statutory text.4
    On the other hand, the computer languages may be capable of modeling
the legal language including ambiguities, its indeterminate legal concepts and

 4
     https://github.com/smucclaw/r34_sCASP.
                         Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


      Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)                              21

discretionality. With the present work we intended to advance in this second
possibility through discretionary decision support systems.5
     In particular, in this paper we have shown that using goal-directed answer
set programming, s(LAW) is capable of modeling vague concepts such as dis-
cretion and ambiguity: The adjudication of school places is a task in the third
octant (BUB). It has a bounded domain with a certain degree of vagueness
(it is not 100% defined) and is a binary decision making. The deduction based
on s(LAW) allows: the consideration of different conclusions (multiple mod-
els) which can be analyzed by humans thanks to the justification generated in
natural language; and the reasoning about the set of these conclusions/mod-
els. To the best of our knowledge, s(LAW) is the only system that exhibits the
property of modelling vague concepts.6
     Our future work unfolds among two major lines. First, complete the model-
ing of the legislation by tabulation for each of the criteria used in the procedure
for adjudication of school places in centers supported with public funds. The
use of this tabulation of criteria to exploit the underlying constraint solver of
s(CASP), and check whether automated decisions can be made when from a
continuous axes (the tabulation criteria) the decision-making is binary. Sec-
ond, we want to explore the combination of different rule-based techniques to
create a hybrid model where (i) the legislation is modeled as rules, (ii) previ-
ous sentences are stored in databases (non-monotonic reasoning is needed to
ensure consistency), and (iii) apply inductive logic programming (instead of
machine learning) to “learn” rules from reduced number of landmark cases.

References
Arias J, Carro M, Salazar E, et al (2018) Constraint Answer Set Pro-
  gramming without Grounding. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
  18(3-4):337–354. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068418000285

Arias J, Moreno-Rebato M, Rodriguez-García JA, et al (2021) Modeling
  Administrative Discretion Using Goal-Directed Answer Set Programming.
  In: Advances in Artificial Intelligence, CAEPIA 20/21. Springer Interna-
  tional Publishing, Cham, pp 258–267, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
  85713-4_25

Branting L (2017) Data-centric and logic-based models for automated legal
  problem solving. Artificial Intelligence and Law 25(1):5–27. https://doi.org/
  10.1007/s10506-017-9193-x

  5
    In the near future, it may become necessary advance in the direction of the first option as well.
In this sense, we note the need to offer mixed curricula, Law and Artificial Intelligence (Rodríguez-
García and Moreno-Rebato, 2018).
  6
    On January 14th , 2021, Dr. Robert Kowalski explained how they bypassed in (Sergot et al,
1986) the representation of vague concepts such as without undue delay (Kowalski, 2021, 1:20:15,
1:26:00).
                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


22    Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

Cabalar P, Fandinno J, Fink M (2014) Causal Graph Justifications of Logic
  Programs. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 14(4-5):603–618.
  https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068414000234

Cobbe J (2019) Administrative law and the machines of government: judicial
  review of automated public-sector decision-making. Legal Studies 39(4):636–
  655. https://doi.org/10.1017/lst.2019.9

Cosculluela Montaner L (2021) Manual de Derecho Administrativo. Thomson
  Reuters Civitas pp 333–ff. ISBN: 978-84-1125-550-9

DARPA (2017) Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI). Defense Advanced
 Research Projects Agency, https://www.darpa.mil/program/explainable-
 artificial-intelligence

Garcia de Enterría E (1962) La lucha contra las inmunidades del
 poder en el derecho administrativo". Revista de Administración
 Pública 38:159–208. URL http://www.cepc.gob.es/sites/default/files/2021-
 12/222271962038159.pdf

Garcia de Enterría E, Fernández TR (2020) Curso de Derecho Administrativo.
 Civitas ISBN: 978-84-1125-553-0

Gelder AV, Ross K, Schlipf J (1991) The Well-Founded Semantics for General
 Logic Programs. Journal of the ACM 38:620–650. https://doi.org/10.1145/
 116825.116838

Gelfond M (1994) Logic programming and reasoning with incomplete informa-
 tion. Annals of mathematics and artificial intelligence 12(1):89–116. https://
 doi.org/10.1007/BF01530762

Gelfond M, Lifschitz V (1988) The Stable Model Semantics for Logic
 Programming. In: 5th International Conference on Logic Programming,
 pp 1070–1080, URL http://www.cse.unsw.edu.au/~cs4415/2010/resources/
 stable.pdf

Genesereth M (2015) Computational Law. The Cop in the Backseat. Codex:
 The Center for Legal Informatics, Stanford University

Huber H (1953) Niedergang des Rechts und Krise des Rechtsstaat. Festgabe
 für Z Giacometti, Zürich p 66

Huergo Lora A (2020) Una aproximación a los algoritmos desde el Dere-
 cho Administrativo, La regulación de los algoritmos. Aranzadi Thomson
 Reuters, ISBN: 978-84-1345-094-0
                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


     Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)         23

Huggins A (2021) Addressing disconnection: automated decision-making,
 administrative law and regulatory reform. UNSW Law Journal 44(3):1048–
 1077. https://doi.org/10.53637/WCGG2401

Kannai R, Schild U, Zeleznikow J (2007) Modeling the evolution of legal
 discretion. an artificial intelligence approach. Ratio Juris 20(4):530–558

Kowalski RA (2021) Logical English = Logic + English + Compupting.
 https://utdallas.app.box.com/s/ngsyloscj5sk24uh3axexxz451o74z0u, Hack-
 Reason Opening Ceremony. Last accessed 19 April 2021

Liebwald D (2015) On transparent law, good legislation and accessibility to
  legal information: Towards an integrated legal information system. Arti-
  ficial Intelligence and Law 23(3):301–314. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-
  015-9172-z

Marple K, Salazar E, Gupta G (2017) Computing Stable Models of Normal
 Logic Programs Without Grounding. arXiv 1709.00501. URL http://arxiv.
 org/abs/1709.00501, https://arxiv.org/abs/arXiv:1709.00501

Cerrillo i Martínez A (2020) ¿Son fiables las decisiones de las Adminis-
  traciones públicas adoptadas por algoritmos? European review of digital
  administration & law 1(1):18–36

Moreno Rebato M (2021) Inteligencia artificial (Umbrales éticos, Derecho y
 Administraciones públicas), Thomson Reuters, Aranzadi, pp 120–ff. ISBN:
 978-84-1391-029-1

Otenyo E (2016) Administrative Discretion. In: Farazmand A (ed) Global
  Encyclopedia of Public Administration, Public Policy, and Governance.
  Springer, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-31816-5_955-1

Perry M (2017) iDecide: Administrative Decision-Making in the Digital World.
  Australian Law Journal 91(1):29

Pontelli E, Son TC, El-Khatib O (2009) Justifications for Logic Programs
  under Answer Set Semantics. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming
  9(1):1–56. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068408003633

Ramakrishna S, Górski Ł, Paschke A (2016) A dialogue between a lawyer and
  computer scientist: the evaluation of knowledge transformation from legal
  text to computer-readable format. Applied Artificial Intelligence 30(3):216–
  232. https://doi.org/10.1080/08839514.2016.1156952

Rodríguez-García JA, Moreno-Rebato M (2018) ¡El futuro ya está aquí!
 Derecho e inteligencia artificial. Revista Aranzadi de Derecho y nuevas
 tecnologías 48. ISSN: 1696-0351
                    Springer Nature 2021 LATEX template


24    Automated Legal Reasoning with Discretion to Act using s(LAW)

Schild UJ, Zeleznikow J (2005) A taxonomy for modelling discretionary deci-
  sion making in the legal domain. In: Proceedings of the 10th international
  conference on Artificial intelligence and law, pp 60–64, https://doi.org/10.
  1145/1165485.1165495

Schulz C, Toni F (2016) Justifying Answer Sets Using Argumentation. Theory
  and Practice of Logic Programming 16(1):59–110. https://doi.org/10.1017/
  S1471068414000702

Sergot MJ, Sadri F, Kowalski RA, et al (1986) The british nationality act as
  a logic program. Communications of the ACM 29(5):370–386. https://doi.
  org/10.1145/5689.5920

Sourdin T (2021) Judges, Technology and Artificial Intelligence: The Artifi-
  cial Judge, Edward Elgar Publishing Limited, pp 228–ff. https://doi.org/10.
  4337/9781788978262

Suksi M (2021) Administrative due process when using automated decision-
  making in public administration: some notes from a finnish perspective. Arti-
  ficial Intelligence and Law 29(1):87–110. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-
  020-09269-x

Susskind R (2017) Tomorrow’s Lawyers: An Introduction to Your Future, 2nd
  edn. Oxford University Press, ISBN: 978-01-9879-663-3

Swift T, Warren DS (2012) XSB: Extending Prolog with Tabled Logic Pro-
  gramming. Theory and Practice of Logic Programming 12(1-2):157–187.
  https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068411000500

Sánchez Morón M (2021) Derecho Administrativo. Parte General. Tecnos pp
  91–ff. ISBN: 978-84-309-8529-6

Vestri G (2021) La inteligencia artificial ante el desafío de la transparencia
  algorítmica: Una aproximación desde la perspectiva jurídico-administrativa.
  Revista Aragonesa de Administración Pública (56):368–398
