Language Models and Logic Programs for Trustworthy Tax Reasoning
							| Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
Skip to main content
Skip to main navigation menu
Skip to site footer
Open Menu
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
Current
Archives
About
About the Journal
Submissions
Privacy Statement
Contact
Search
Login
Home
/
Archives
/
Vol. 40 No. 45: AAAI-26 Special Track AI for Social Impact I
/
AAAI Special Track on AI for Social Impact I
Language Models and Logic Programs for Trustworthy Tax Reasoning
Authors
William Jurayj
Johns Hopkins University
Nils Holzenberger
Télécom ParisTech
Benjamin Van Durme
Johns Hopkins University
DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v40i45.41212
Abstract
According to the United States Internal Revenue Service, "the average American spends $270 and 13 hours filing their taxes".
Even beyond the U.S., tax filing requires complex reasoning, combining application of overlapping rules with numerical calculations. Because errors can incur costly penalties, any automated system must deliver high accuracy and auditability, making modern large language models (LLMs) poorly suited for this task. We propose an approach that integrates LLMs with a symbolic solver to calculate tax obligations.
We evaluate variants of this system on the challenging StAtutory Reasoning Assessment (SARA) dataset, and include a novel method for estimating the cost of deploying such a system based on real-world penalties for tax errors. 
We further show how combining up-front translation of plain-text rules into formal logic programs, combined with intelligently retrieved exemplars for formal case representations, can dramatically improve performance on this task and reduce costs to well below real-world averages.
Our results demonstrate the effectiveness of applying semantic parsing methods to statutory reasoning, and show promising economic feasibility of neuro-symbolic architectures for increasing access to reliable tax assistance.
Downloads
PDF
Published
2026-03-14
How to Cite
Jurayj, W., Holzenberger, N., & Van Durme, B. (2026). Language Models and Logic Programs for Trustworthy Tax Reasoning.
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
,
40
(45), 38688–38698. https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v40i45.41212
More Citation Formats
ACM
ACS
APA
ABNT
Chicago
Harvard
IEEE
MLA
Turabian
Vancouver
Download Citation
Endnote/Zotero/Mendeley (RIS)
BibTeX
Issue
Vol. 40 No. 45: AAAI-26 Special Track AI for Social Impact I
Section
AAAI Special Track on AI for Social Impact I
Information
For Readers
For Authors
For Librarians
Part of the
PKP Publishing Services Network
Copyright © 2024, Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence