Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)




HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue

T.J.M. Bench-Capon




the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later


Abstract This paper is an introduction to a virtual special issue of AI and Law
exploring the legacy of the influential HYPO system of Rissland and Ashley [116]
and [19]. The papers included are:
 – Arguments and cases: An inevitable intertwining [134].
 – BankXX: Supporting legal arguments through heuristic retrieval [124].
 – Modelling reasoning with precedents in a formal dialogue Game [108].
 – A note on dimensions and factors [117].
 – An empirical investigation of reasoning with legal cases through theory con-
    struction and application [66]
 – Automatically classifying case texts and predicting outcomes [21].
 – A factor-based definition of precedential constraint [91].
 – An improved factor based approach to precedential constraint [110].
After describing HYPO, in this introduction to the special issue I look at vari-
ous aspects of its influence on AI and Law: the developments led by Rissland at
Amherst; the developments led by Ashley in Pittsburgh; the expression of these
ideas in terms of rule based systems, and their subsequent formalisation; value
based theories, which were inspired by a critique of HYPO; and contemporary
approaches which revive the idea of dimensions.


1 Introduction

It is now thirty years since HYPO came to the attention of the international
AI and Law Community at the very first ICAIL at which [116] and [23] were
presented. Although Edwina Rissland had published previously on reasoning with
hypotheticals in [111], [126] and [113] and its application to law in [112], it was
the PhD project with her student Kevin Ashley which culminated in [19] which

T.J.M. Bench-Capon
Department of Computer Science
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
E-mail: tbc@csc.liv.ac.uk
2                                                                             T.J.M. Bench-Capon


is generally regarded as the HYPO system (first referred to as such in [127]).
Over the past 30+ years HYPO has been without doubt the most influential AI
and Law project, setting the agenda for reasoning with legal cases, arguing with
legal cases, rule based approaches to reasoning with cases and formalisations of
precedential reasoning. The papers in this virtual special issue, which are drawn
from all three decades, represent a range of significant papers which have built
upon and developed ideas from the HYPO system. In this introduction I will use
these papers to illustrate HYPO’s considerable legacy. There are, of course, many
other papers, a number of which were published in other venues which are needed
to tell the whole story, but the selection in this issue is fairly representative of
the way thinking in AI and Law has developed. A number of other papers will be
referred to in this introduction, so that the complete story can be told.
    Section 2 describes HYPO and its key features, in particular its represen-
tation of cases as dimensions, and its conception of the form of a legal argu-
ment. Section 3 describes some direct descendants of HYPO, led by Rissland
at Amherst: CABARET [134]*1 , which combined rule-based and case-based rea-
soning; BankXX [124]* which envisaged constructing legal arguments by heuristic
search over a rich network of argument pieces; and SPIRE [119], which used HYPO
derived techniques to drive a system to retrieve legal cases. Section 4 considers the
developments from HYPO led by Ashley following his move to Pittsburgh. The
most influential is CATO, carried out with his student Vincent Aleven, [13]. CATO
was never the topic of an article in this journal, and is most completely reported
in [10] and [11]. CATO is best known for its move from dimensions to factors, and
its organisation of these factors into a factor hierarchy. A subsequent project with
another of Ashley’s students, Stefanie Brüninghaus, led to Issue Based Prediction
(IBP) [21]*. During the 1980s and the early 1990s, case-based and rule-based ap-
proaches to legal reasoning were seen as distinct. Some saw them as potentially
complimentary as in CABARET, but others, especially in Europe with its logic
programming and civil law traditions, saw them as opposed to one another. An
important paper by Prakken and Sartor [108]*, however, demonstrated how a set
of precedents could be represented as a set of rules and priorities between them.
This enabled formal accounts of reasoning with cases to be developed [91]* and
[110]*. Representation as rules also permitted the use of argumentation schemes
to support reasoning with cases: [144], [39] and [109]. The move to rules and the
formailsation of the reasoning is described in section 5. Another direction was ini-
tiated by [56], which led to preferences being explained in terms of purpose and
values. This idea was formalised as theory construction in [53], and explored em-
pirically in [66]*. These developments are explored in section 6. Although HYPO
is the fons et origo of all this work, mostly it has been based on factors, as pre-
sented in CATO. There has, however, been interest in reviving dimensions to allow
more nuance to be captured. The differences between dimensions and factors are
discussed in [117]*. Although the return to dimensions was argued for in [50], in
is only more recently that work on this has intensified: [109], [17] and [6]. This
work is discussed in section 7, and some concluding remarks are made and open
questions identified in section 8.



    1   The papers in this virtual special issue are indicated with an “*”.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                        3


2 HYPO

Although the ideas relating to HYPO were around earlier, (a panel was held at
IJCAI 1985 [114], with panellists including both Rissland and Ashley, together
with Michael Dyer, Anne Gardner, Thorne McCarty and Donald Waterman), de-
tails of HYPO itself began to emerge at the first ICAIL in 1987 [116]. By 1989
Ashley had moved to Pittsburgh and so the discussion of HYPO at the second
ICAIL was his sole authored [18], and his 1988 PhD thesis appeared in book form
as [19], providing the most detailed account of the project. HYPO operated in
the domain of US Trade Secrets Law. Essentially the law protected trade secrets
against misappropriation. To be a trade secret the information needed to have
value, and to be regarded as a secret by the plaintiff, shown by making reason-
able efforts to maintain secrecy. Misappropriation took the form either of using
information knowing it to be confidential, or acquiring the information by dubious
means, such as deception of bribery. Defences typically turned on the availability
of the information through legitimate sources, or independent development of the
information.
    The most important ideas behind HYPO were dimensions, and a particular
conception of argumentation, namely three-ply argument. These will be discussed
in turn in the following subsections.


2.1 Dimensions

A major difficulty when thinking about how to reason with legal cases is that cases
which are held to be similar appear to be very different when we consider their
facts. Thus in a famous line of cases considered in [94], [44] and [128] a collection
of very different things are seen to play the same role in the various cases2 . These
include a scaffold, an elevator, a bottle of aerated water and a coffee urn which
were all held to be relevantly similar to an automobile for the purposes of the
particular legal point under consideration. Similarly the series of property cases
much studied in AI and Law consider a fox, wild ducks, a shoal of pilchards and a
whale all to be relevantly similar to the baseball disputed in Popov v Hayashi (see
[24]). Thus deciding whether two legal cases are relevantly similar does not seem
to be a matter of considering facts in a simple manner using everyday notions of
similarity.
    For this reason HYPO introduced the notion of dimensions to match and com-
pare cases. These are aspects of the case, ascribed on the basis of facts, which
are relevant to the legal issues being considered. Thus what linked the scaffold,
elevator, bottle of aerated water and coffee urn was that all were dangerous, but
not visibly so. What links the animals and the baseball is that they were being
pursued, and the relevant aspects include their value, and their connection to the
land they were pursued on [43].
  2 The need to consider disparate types of thing as if they were the same sort of thing

is pervasive in analytic philosophy. Austin wrote in [30] “But then we have to ask, of course,
what this class comprises. We are given, as examples, ‘familiar objects’–chairs, tables, pictures,
books, flowers, pens, cigarettes; the expression ‘material thing’ is not here (or anywhere else
in Ayer’s text) further defined. But does the ordinary man believe that what he perceives
is (always) something like furniture, or like these other ‘familiar objects’ - moderate-sized
specimens of dry goods?”.
4                                                                    T.J.M. Bench-Capon


    Dimensions are aspects of a case which may or may not be applicable. If appli-
cable, the dimension represents a vector, taking a range of values which entirely
favour one of the parties at one end and then increasingly favour the other party,
until at the other end of the range the dimension entirely favours that other party.
At some point the dimension will cease to favour the plaintiff and at some point
(possibly the same point) it will start to favour the defendant. Thus if there are
n dimensions, we have a n-dimensional space, with the plaintiff favoured at some
locations and defendant favoured at others.
    We can illustrate dimensions using the domain of the Automobile Exception
to the 4th Amendment, discussed in [115], [22] and [7]. This is a good illustration
because it can be seen as having just two dimensions, privacy and exigency, which
allows the space to be pictured, as in Figure 1. Essentially the 4th Amendment
provides that

    “[t]he right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and
    effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated,
    and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath
    or affirmation, ...”

     The automobile exception permits search of an automobile without a warrant
provided that there is probable cause, and that the search is sufficiently exigent.
Exigency arises from the possibility that the delay in seeking a warrant might com-
promise the collection of evidence or public safety. If we consider the dimension of
exigency, a completely immovable item would represent one end of the dimension
and an automobile in transit on a highway the other. If we arrange our precedents
along this dimension we will observe that at one extreme, where there is little
exigency, all the cases will require a warrant, and at the other, where the matter
is pressing, none of the cases will require a warrant. In between, some cases will
need a warrant and some will not, suggesting that other relevant dimensions are
in play. The situation is represented pictorially by the vertical grey lines in Figure
13 . Similarly for privacy, at one end (e.g. intimate body search) reasonable expec-
tations of privacy will be such that a warrant will always be required, whereas at
the other (in plain view in a public space) there may be little or no expectation
of privacy so that a warrant may never be required. This situation is shown by
the horizontal lines of Figure 1. Putting the two dimensions together, the lines
divide the space into 9 two-dimensional areas. In A, D and G, there is insufficient
exigency to merit warrantless search, whereas in C and F the exigency is such
(perhaps an immediate threat to the life of the President) that no expectations
of privacy are sufficient to require a warrant. In A, B and C there are insufficient
expectations of privacy to require a warrant given any degree of exigency, while
in G and H the expectations of privacy are sufficiently high that no degree of
exigency will permit the search. The interesting areas are E and I. In E there is a
trade off between the two dimensions, so that some kind of balance must be struck
[93]. In area I, unless there is another dimension to consider, a preference needs
to expressed, perhaps based on a preference between values [53]. The dark line in
Figure 1 thus divides the space into areas where a warrant is required (to the left

  3 A similar diagram was actually used in the decision in the Massachussets Trade Secrets

case Sissy Harrington-McGill v. Old Mother Hubbard Dog Food, Inc., Middlesex Superior
Court C.A. 81-4385.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                          5




Fig. 1 Automobile Exception Using Two Dimensions


of the line) and those where it is not (to the right of the line)4 . The line shown
in Figure 1 indicates an even trade off between privacy and exigency (giving the
450 line): other trade-offs are possible, which would require a curve rather than
a line. It also includes area I in the no-warrant space, indicating a preference for
exigency: a different preference would send the line horizontal, excluding I. Note
also that trade-off could be possible throughout the range of the dimensions, so
that areas A and I are squeezed. The right hand grey line effectively represents
the point at which the dimension becomes decisive (subject to preference for a
second dimension which is the decisive range for the other side), what [62] call a
knock-out factor. If both dimensions are such that the area E expands to consume
the whole space, we have a situation where the dimensions are never decisive, but
require to be balanced across their whole range.
    If there is a third dimension the space will become a cube, with 27 partitions,
and more dimensions will make visualisation very hard, although mathematicians
can happily write equations relating to high dimensional spaces5 . If we now po-
sition the precedents in this dimensional space we can see the problem as being
to divide the space into the plaintiff region and the defendant region. In the two
dimensional case of Figure 1, this could be achieved by the black line with the
warrant cases on the left and the non-warrant cases on the right. The problem
would seem to be the kind of line fitting problem which could be addressed by
nearest neighbour or other statistical techniques. But there are two reasons why
such techniques are not suitable here: first it is quite clear that this is not the
way that people reason with cases, and so the point of the exercise, which was to
model lawyer-like reasoning, would not be achieved. But more importantly there
are not really sufficient cases to apply the statistical techniques, which depend
heavily on having abundant examples. HYPO has 13 dimensions and many of the
cases in fact only use some of these, typically no more than 4 or 5. The use of
  4 Those familiar with machine learning will recognise the similarities with a decision bound-

ary in supervised learning.
  5 For example x2 + y 2 = r 2 is a circle of radius r, x2 + y 2 + z 2 = r 2 is a sphere with radius

r, x2 + y 2 + z 2 + w2 = r2 is a four dimensional “4-sphere” sphere with radius r, and so on.
6                                                                         T.J.M. Bench-Capon


line fitting techniques would require hundreds or even thousands of cases (for a
discussion of the required number of cases see [4]). To obtain, let alone perform a
dimensional analysis on, that many cases was far beyond what was sensible to ask
from a nineteen-eighties PhD project. HYPO has 33 cases in its case base [19]. It
remains a task few would undertake, even if cases were available in this quantity6 .
    HYPO models argumentation, rather than using a purely statistical approach.
Given a set of precedents located in the n-dimensional space, and a new case
located in that space, the idea is to find arguments, based on the precedents, for
and against a finding for the plaintiff (or defendant). Given a plaintiff precedent
Pp and a defendant precedent Pd and a current case Cc , the plaintiff’s task is to
argue that Cc is on the same side of the line (or its n-dimensional equivalent) as
Pp rather than Pd . For example, in Figure 1, if Cc is South East of Pp , that is
a strong argument for the plaintiff: if it is South West (or North East) we have
arguments for and against the plaintiff, and if it is North West, it is of no help at
all to the plaintiff.
    In HYPO the arguments were deployed in a Three-Ply argumentation struc-
ture, as described in section 2.2.


2.2 Three-Ply Arguments

HYPO deploys its arguments within a three-ply structure. This structure is also
found in the presentation of oral arguments in the US Supreme Court [2], but in
the Supreme Court the plies take the form of a dialogue between counsel and the
Justices, whereas HYPO arguments are presented uninterruptedly (as if by the
counsel), rather than in a dialogue. The three plies are:
1. Cite a Case: One side (say the plaintiff) cites a case found for that side.
   That case should be as similar (on-point ) as possible to the current case, and
   the suggestion is that the decision in the precedent should be applied to the
   current case (following the principle of stare decisis, which means let the decision
   stand ).
2. Response: The defendant responds to the plaintiff by distinguishing (that is,
   pointing to significant differences which mean that the precedent should not
   be followed), and by citing counter examples, precedent cases found for the
   defendant that are at least as on-point as the case cited by the plaintiff.
3. Rebuttal: The plaintiff now attempts to rebut the contentions made by the
   defendant in the second ply: distinguishing the counter examples, emphasising
   any strengths and attempting to show that any weaknesses are not fatal.
    Each of these plies will be explained below.

2.2.1 Citing a Case

HYPO measures similarity between cases in terms of four metrics: on pointness
(the degree of overlap in terms of dimensions), outcome, the magnitudes of shared
dimensions and potential relevance as a near miss. To assess on pointenss, cases are
  6 Where large quantities of cases are available, they tend to be subjected to machine learning

techniques rather than manual analysis. A recent example is [9], which will be discussed in
more detail later (see footnote 12).
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                7


(partially) ordered in a Claims Lattice, as shown in Figure 2. The lattice includes
every case which shares at least one dimension with the case being considered.
Figure 2 shows the Claims Lattics for USM Corp v Marson Fastener Corp 7 . Note
that a precedent is considered more on point than another precedent only if the
dimensions of the second precedent form a proper subset of the dimensions of
the first. Thus Space Aero v Darling, which shares three dimensions with USM,
is not considered more on point than Automated Systems, which shares only two,
because the dimensions of Automated Systems are not a proper subset of Space Aero
v Darling and so they are on different branches of the lattice. The most on point
case, decided for the desired party, and which does not have a more on point case
for the other party is the one to cite. Of the three first level cases in Figure 2, only
Space Aero v Darling was found for the plaintiff, and so will be cited in the first
ply. If there are equally on point cases, several arguments, based on the different
cases, could be made in the first ply.

2.2.2 Response

The defendant must now provide a response. First, an attempt to distinguish Space
Aero should be made. Distinctions can be made by showing that the precedent is
stronger for the plaintiff, or by showing that the current case is stronger for the
defendant. One way in which this can be done is in terms of different dimensions:
if there is a dimension present in one case but not the other, that can provide a
reason for saying that the precedent does not govern the current case, although
it might still do so if there are also reasons for finding that this distinction is not
sufficient. This issue was explored in more depth in CATO, as discussed in section
4.1. To be a good distinction the different dimension should represent a strength
(weakness) for the plaintiff if it is in the precedent (current) case, and a strength
(weakness) for the defendant if it is the current (precedent) case. The differences
between these two ways of distinguishing is discussed in [39]. Thus in USM, that
secrets were disclosed to outsiders in USM but not Space Aero could be used as
a distinction, since it represents a weakness for USM. A second way in which a
precedent can be distinguished is on a shared dimension. Thus if the information
gave a larger competitive advantage to the defendant in Space Aero than USM,
that could be a point of distinction.
    Having made the distinctions between the plaintiff’s precedent and the current
case, the defendant may now cite counter examples of his own. Both Automated
Systems and Crown Industries would be possible counter examples since they are
as on point as Space Aero and found for the defendant.

2.2.3 Rebuttal

The rebuttal stage gives the plaintiff the opportunity to answer the points made
by the defendant in the response. Three types of answer are possible:
 – Distinguish the counter examples. This can be done in the same ways as the
   defendant distinguished the plaintiff’s precedent in the response.
  7 379 Mass. 90 (1979). This case which concerned the manufacture of blind rivets, turned

largely on whether the security measures taken were adequate.
8                                                   T.J.M. Bench-Capon




Fig. 2 Claims Lattice for USM, Figure 8.2 in [19]
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                           9


 – Emphasise strengths. If the current case is more favourable to the plaintiff on
   some dimensions than a precedent which already favours the plaintiff, that is
   a strength worth emphasising.
 – Show weaknesses not fatal. If the defendant has distinguished a case by showing
   that the plaintiff is weaker on some shared dimension than a precedent found
   for the defendant, this can be shown to be not a fatal weakness by finding
   another precedent which as weak or weaker on that dimension but which was
   found for the plaintiff. This shows that we are in an area of that dimension
   which has mixed outcomes, suggesting that it is some other dimension that is
   decisive.
    An important idea in HYPO (the name of the PhD project derived from Riss-
land’s earlier work on hypothetical reasoning) is that if the current case falls
between precedents with different outcomes, hypothetical cases can be used, vary-
ing the position on the dimension, or by adding or removing a dimension, so that
intuitions can suggest exactly where the line should be drawn, and on which side
the current case should fall. This aspect of HYPO was perhaps less exploited in
the HYPO system in its final form than might have been hoped.
    Thus HYPO has a structure within which to deploy the extensive range of
arguments made possible by applying its dimensional analysis to the cases. In the
next section I will discuss the thirteen dimensions used by HYPO in [19].


2.3 Dimensions in HYPO

As mentioned before, HYPO uses thirteen dimensions. But these are not homo-
geneous. The paradigmatic dimension is continuous, running from the extreme
plaintiff to the extreme defendant location. But some of the dimensions in HYPO
are not continuous: rather their range comprises a set of enumerable points. In
other examples the dimension degrades to just two points: the extreme plaintiff
and the extreme defendant point, and no intermediate points are recognised. Fi-
nally the dimension may degrade to a single point: for example if the defendant
paid a bribe that is a strong point for the plaintiff, but if no bribe was paid that
does not help the defendant’s case, rather it means that the dimension does not
apply to the case. HYPO’s dimensions and their types are listed below:

1. Competitive Advantage Gained. This dimension combines the development costs
   in terms of time and in terms of money. It is not entirely clear how these
   are combined, but the dimension can be regarded as continuous. It might
   have proved convenient to split into two dimensions: time savings and money
   savings.
2. Vertical Knowledge : Vertical knowledge is contrasted with technical knowledge,
   and vertical knowledge favours the defendant. This is a binary dimension,
3. Secrets Voluntarily Disclosed : This is simply the number of people to whom
   there was voluntary disclosure. It is continuous.
4. Discloses Subject to Restriction : This is the percentage of disclosures which are
   subject to restriction. As such it is potentially continuous, but in [19] only 0%
   or 100% are recognised and so it is effectively binary.
5. Agreement Supported by Consideration : This refers to a (confidentiality or non-
   disclosure) agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant, and is a binary
10                                                                T.J.M. Bench-Capon


    dimension: the amount of the consideration is not thought important in [19],
    as is usual in law. Peppercorn rents are an example where the consideration is
    purely nominal.
 6. Common Employee Paid to Change Employers : Although this again could in prin-
    ciple be considered continuous, no account is taken of the number of employees
    concerned, nor of the amount paid, and so it is better regarded as binary. In
    fact, since the dimension does not really apply if there are no common employ-
    ees, it is effectively unary.
 7. Exists Express Noncompetition Agreement : This refers to an agreement between
    the plaintiff and former employees. It is binary.
 8. Common Employee Transferred Product Tools : This is best regarded as unary:
    the dimension does not apply if there are no common employees, or they did
    not bring tools.
 9. Non-Disclosure Agreement Re Defendant Access : This is an agreement between
    plaintiff and defendant, and is binary.
10. Common Employee Sole Developer : If the sole developer transferred employer,
    it may be considered reasonable that he takes his knowledge with him. This is
    a binary, or perhaps even unary, dimension.
11. Non-disclosure Agreement Specific : This dimension only applies if there is a non-
    disclosure agreement between the plaintiff and the defendant, and no degrees
    of specificity are recognised, so that it is binary.
12. Disclosure in Negotiations with Defendant : Such disclosures can weaken the
    plaintiff’s case. It is a binary dimension.
13. Security Measures Adopted : This an enumerated range with eight points, rang-
    ing from the extreme pro-defendant point (minimal measures) to the extreme
    pro-plaintiff point (employee non-disclosure agreements).

    After HYPO, Ashley moved to University of Pittsburgh (specifically to the
School of Law and Learning, Research and Development Centre). At Pittsburgh,
Ashley developed CATO, with Vincent Aleven [10], and SMILE and Issue Based
Prediction (IBP) with Stefanie Brüninghaus [21]. Meanwhile Rissland continued
to develop the HYPO ideas at Amherst producing CABARET with David Skalak
[134], BankXX with Skalak and M. Timur Friedman [124] and SPIRE with Jody
Daniels [119]. A major difference between these two strands was their use and
understanding of factors. As explained in [117], both groups adopted the more legal
sounding term “factors” in preference to the mathematical term “dimensions”. But
whereas at Amherst, factors were just a different term for HYPO’s dimensions,
a related but different notion was used in Pittsburgh. The Amherst systems will
be discussed in section 3 and the Pittsburgh systems, and the notion of factor as
used there, in section 4.


3 Beyond HYPO

Work on reasoning with legal cases was continued at Amherst by Edwina Rissland,
working with a succession of PhD students, David Skalak, M. Timur Friedman
and Jody Daniels. Two of the resulting systems are described in papers in this
special issue, [134] and [124], and the details of these two systems will be left to
them. The domains for these systems are the Home Office Deduction (an allowance
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                    11


against income tax when part of one’s home is used as an office) for CABARET
and personal bankruptcy for BankXX and SPIRE.


3.1 CABARET

CABARET was described in conference papers, including [121], [120] and [133],
before being consolidated in [122] and [134] (the very first paper to appear in this
journal), which focussed in particular on strategies and argument moves. Because it
took as its domain Home Office Deduction, there was a basis for the law in statutes,
whereas HYPO had started from case law and its consolidation in the Restatement
of Torts. This enabled CABARET to take as its focus the interpretation of terms
found in the statutes, the idea being that the meaning of such terms is clarified and
refined in case law. Thus while the statutes can be represented using rules, much in
the manner of [132], when “the rules run out” [72], it is necessary to use case based
techniques. The process is well explained by Ron Loui in his commentary on [133]
in [40]. In this way the rules are able to focus the search and partition the case base
so that there are fewer irrelevant distinctions made during the response (and the
case base can provide precedents that govern more cases, since differences which
relate to terms not at issue are not considered)8 . This use of high level rules to
focus and drive the lower level case based reasoning was a significant improvement,
also used in IBP [62] and still in use today [7].
    Also CABARET developed a taxonomy of argument moves to represent pat-
terns of actual legal argument, such as straw man and make-weight arguments, and
showed how these were supported by the dimensional analysis of precedent cases.
This was an important development since it enabled consideration of strategies for
deploying arguments, an idea later developed through the use of dialogue games,
such as The Pleadings Game [73], the game of [107], TDG [45], and PADUA [143],
amongst others.
    Both of the aspects introduced in CABARET represent significant develop-
ments of HYPO, allowing the dimensional analysis of cases to be employed in the
context of rule interpretation, and for arguments with a more natural and familiar
form to be used a strategic manner.


3.2 BankXX

BankXX, which operates in the domain of personal bankruptcy (specifically Chap-
ter 13 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code), was most fully reported in [124] (in this
issue) and its evaluation described in [125], an earlier conference version having
appeared as [123]. BankXX represents a considerable departure from HYPO and
CABARET, since it uses the precedents (and other sources) to represent the do-
main knowledge as a highly interconnected network of building blocks which which
is searched to gather argument pieces. The nodes in this network encompass a wide
variety of ways of representing the domain knowledge including cases as collec-
tions of facts, cases as dimensionally-analyzed fact situations, cases as bundles of
citations, and cases as prototypical factual scripts, as well as legal theories rep-
resented in terms of domain dimensions. Thus cases are represented in several
 8   An alternative approach to reasoning with portions of precedents is offered by [59].
12                                                                     T.J.M. Bench-Capon


ways. In particular, in its Domain Factor Space, cases are represented “by a vec-
tor composed of the magnitudes of the case on each dimension that applies to it;
non-applicable factors are encoded as NIL. This ... represents a case as a point
in an n-dimensional space.” Arguments are then formed by performing heuristic
search over the network, using evaluation functions at the domain level, the ar-
gumentation piece level, and the overall argument level. The result is a highly
sophisticated system which can blend the more Boolean nature of CATO’s factor-
based approach with the more value-oriented nature of HYPO’s dimension-based
approach. Further, the factors are grouped according to various theories, which,
as in CABARET, gives some structure to the set of all factors.
    The evaluation in [125] is one of the most (if not the most) detailed examples
of evaluation in AI and Law. It considers several different forms of the BankXX
program, and the evaluation is conducted from several perspectives, and a number
of issues relating specifically to the evaluation of programs in the domain of law
are noted.
    BankXX has been rather unduly neglected9 , and has no obvious descendants
in current AI and Law research. This does scant justice to the importance of
the work. Construction of cases by performing heuristic search was also carried
out by AGATHA [65], but the search tree was over only a collection of cases
represented as bundles of CATO-style factors, rather than the highly sophisticated
network of knowledge used in BankXX. Perhaps AI and Law should make more
use of traditional AI techniques such as heuristic search. It is to be hoped that
the appearance of BankXX in this special issue may revive interest in this work,
and perhaps lead to more thorough evaluations of work in AI and Law. Evaluation
remains an issue in AI and Law [68].


3.3 SPIRE

SPIRE [118], [119] and [69], which was applied to both the domain of home office
deduction and the domain of personal bankruptcy, used case based reasoning to
kick-start (seed ) an information retrieval system. The idea was that in this way a
large case base could be searched, but only a small number of these cases need be
given the detailed analysis required for dimensional case based reasoning. From a
case based reasoning view point this gives access to very much larger corpora of
cases, while from an information retrieval point of view it enables the formulation
of better queries.
    The system operates in two stages (originally developed separately: the name
SPIRE was not used in the earlier papers).
 – First [118], [119], the analysed cases are used to retrieve documents (case de-
     cisions) that are relevant to the presented problem case, and
 – Second, within those retrieved documents, passages that contain information
     relevant to specific case features are highlighted. Here the “case base” (more
     like an examples base) was a collection of excerpts; one set for each term of
     interest (such as the sincerity of the debtor). Differences with other systems
     in the HYPO family are that: they are not structured objects like cases, (but
  9 As of March 2017, [124] had received only 83 citations on Google Scholar, and the evalu-

ation in [125] a mere 19.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                         13


   only snippets of text; the same set of excerpts is used for all attempts to
   locate passages and thus, there is no attempt to make the selection of “see”
   excerpts“relevant” to the case at hand. The idea was then to do something
   analogous for case retrieval, but this time on an individual document and to
   locate relevant passages within it.

    These two stages were put together as SPIRE [69]. For SPIRE, the input was
a fact situation and the output was a set of relevant passages in each of the most
relevant cases. It would then be possible to use these passages to query the main
case base.
    The engine used to query the main case base was INQUERY [64], developed
by the University of Massachusetts Information Retrieval group in the Center for
Intelligent Information Retrieval (CIIR). The use of HYPO is in selecting the
seed cases: the top two layers of the case lattice proved to be a good choice for
determining the cases to use.
    Several different queries were tried , including bag of words, set of words and
what was termed a “sum” query which required terms from within an excerpt to
be found co-occurring in the passage, and some weighting methods. Among the
results was that bag of words performed better than set of words, and bag of words
and sum performed better than the other query types tried.
    Although an interesting use of legal cased based reasoning, and with some en-
couraging results, SPIRE was not widely influential. This may be because Daniels
went on to have a successful career in the US Army after finishing at Amherst, but
in any case information retrieval is a hard field for research to make a lasting im-
pact in because of the rapid development of technology. The tools now available for
information retrieval are such as could only have been dreamed of in the mid-90s
when the SPIRE research was carried out (which was before Google transformed
the way we access information).




4 Doing Things with Factors

Following HYPO, Kevin Ashley moved to Pittsburgh in 1989, and continued to
work on reasoning with legal cases, using many of the ideas developed in HYPO.
Significantly, Ashley moved specifically to the Learning and Development Research
Center. This connection with the Learning Center had a significant influence on
Ashley’s projects, in that the task focus became legal education. Also the position
gave access to real classes of legal students for evaluation of these systems. Ash-
ley took full advantage of this opportunity and his work at Pittsburgh is marked
by it focus on empirical evaluation and the use of carefully designed experiments
to produce empirical results. His student, Vincent Aleven, with whom he devel-
oped CATO (first mentioned as such in [12]), entitled his PhD Teaching case-based
argumentation through a model and examples [10], and it made extensive use of
law students in its evaluation. The key systems we will look at in this introduc-
tion, because of their influence on AI and Law, are CATO and IBP [62] and [21].
Other projects carried out by Ashley at this time included Sirocco [99] with Bruce
McLaren.
14                                                                T.J.M. Bench-Capon


4.1 CATO

The task CATO was intended to address was to support teaching law students to
distinguish cases. Not every difference between a case and a precedent represents a
usable distinction. If we think think in two dimensions, as in Figure 1, the plaintiff
“owns” the area to the south-east of the precedent. Therefore a distinction has to
place the current case to the north or west of the precedent since otherwise the
difference actually strengthens the case, and the current case can be decided in the
same way as the precedent using an a fortiori argument. Even if the distinction
is usable, however, it may be that there are other differences between the current
case and the precedent which can be used to compensate for or cancel out the
identified distinction. Such a difference enables the distinction to be downplayed.
If a distinction cannot be downplayed it may be considered significant, and so can
be emphasised. Thus the task of CATO was to teach students:
 – which differences between a case and a precedent can be used as distinctions,
 – which distinctions can be downplayed,
 – how to downplay distinctions.

4.1.1 Factors in CATO

A major difference between HYPO and CATO was the use of factors instead of
dimensions. In HYPO cases had been represented in terms of their facts, and the
facts used to determine whether the dimension was active in a particular case
and, if active, where on the dimension the case lay. Factors are also related to
facts, but are attributed by the analyst on the basis of the case facts, so that
factors are simply present in or absent from a case and cases can be represented
as bundles of factors. Thus in CATO facts are seen only by the analyst Another
important feature of factors, is that the presence of a factor always favours the
same side: a factor is either pro-plaintiff or pro-defendant. In sum factors can
be considered as stereotypical patterns of fact that favour one party or the other.
While this is something of a simplification when compared to dimensions, it does
not affect the task being taught: the difference between cases can be considered
in terms of differences between the factors present in the cases: the process of
attributing factors is not important to this particular task.
    Because HYPO and CATO both use the same domain, US Trade Secrets, direct
comparison can be made between CATO’s factors and HYPO’s dimensions. CATO
used 26 factors (F1-F27 - there was no F9), as shown in Table 1. The Table also
shows any relation of the factors to HYPO dimensions: Dimensions are identified
using the numbers in section 2.3.
    All but one of the dimensions (which relates to contract law rather than trade
secrets) in HYPO correspond to one or more factors. In addition there are a num-
ber of factors which are unrelated to HYPO dimensions: these mostly relate to
legitimate and questionable means of discovering the information. CATO anal-
ysed more cases (148 as against 33) and so it is to be expected that new factors
or dimensions will emerge from the analysis. In fact if we replace D2 with a di-
mension Questionable Means, and introduce a new dimension Legitimate Means we
can locate most of these new factors on these dimensions. Or we could see these
as a single dimension with F22 as the extreme pro-plaintiff point and F24 as the
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                              15

 ID     Factor                              HYPO Dimension

 F1     DisclosureInNegotiations (d)        Defendant end of D12
 F2     BribeEmployee (p)                   D6
 F3     EmployeeSoleDeveloper (d)           D10
 F4     AgreedNotToDisclose (p)             Plaintiff end of D9
 F5     AgreementNotSpecific (d)            Defendant end of D11
 F6     SecurityMeasures (p)                Any point of D13 except extreme Defendant end
 F7     BroughtTools (p)                    D8
 F8     CompetitiveAdvantage (p)            Plaintiff end of D1
 F10    SecretsDisclosedOutsiders (d)       Any point of D3 except extreme Plaintiff end
 F11    VerticalKnowledge (d)               Defendant end of D2
 F12    OutsiderDisclosuresRestricted (p)   Plaintiff end of D4
 F13    NoncompetitionAgreement (p)         Plaintiff end of D7
 F14    RestrictedMaterialsUsed (p)         Not in HYPO
 F15    UniqueProduct (p)                   Not in HYPO
 F16    InfoReverseEngineerable (d)         Not in HYPO
 F17    InfoIndependentlyGenerated (d)      Not in HYPO
 F18    IdenticalProducts (p)               Not in HYPO
 F19    NoSecurityMeasures (d)              Defendant end of D13
 F20    InfoKnownToCompetitors (d)          Not in HYPO
 F21    KnewInfoConfidential (p)            Not in HYPO
 F22    InvasiveTechniques (p)              Not in HYPO
 F23    WaiverOfConfidentiality (d)         Not in HYPO
 F24    InfoObtainableElsewhere (d)         Not in HYPO
 F25    InfoReverseEngineered (d)           Not in HYPO
 F26    Deception (p)                       Not in HYPO
 F27    DisclosureInPublicForum (d)         Point on D3 towards Defendant end
Table 1 Base Level Factors in CATO



extreme pro-plaintiff point. F15 and F18 are harder to locate on this dimension,
and so a second new dimension may be required for them. The important thing is
that there is a mapping from dimension points to factors, which would allow the
HYPO cases to be expressed as factors (the missing dimension D5 is used only to
invalidate agreements). In general it is possible to see factors as points (or ranges)
on HYPO dimensions. But this does mean that the analyst decides at what point
the dimension ceases to favour the plaintiff and begins to favour the defendant,
rather than this question forming part of the argumentation.
    Representing cases as bundles of factors make it very easy to discover differ-
ences between cases. As noted in [144] this means that when comparing cases the
factors can be placed in one of seven partitions:
A Plaintiff factors in both current case and precedent.
B Defendant factors in both current case and precedent.
C Plaintiff factors in current case not in precedent.
D Defendant factors in current not in precedent case.
E Defendant factors in precedent case not in current case.
F Plaintiff factors in precedent not in current case.
G Factors (both plaintiff and defendant) not in either current case or precedent
    This partitioning was first used in [15] from which Figure 3 is taken.
    (A) and (B) represent what is similar in the cases. For the precedent case to
serve as a precedent for current case there must be at least one factor in at least
one of these partitions. (C) and (D) represent aspects in which current case is
16                                                                  T.J.M. Bench-Capon




Fig. 3 Partioning CATO factors from [15]



stronger for the plaintiff than the precedent, and so cannot be used to distinguish
the precedent. (E) and (F) represent aspects in which current case is weaker for the
plaintiff than the precedent, and so can be used to distinguish the precedent. (G)
contains the factors which are not relevant in the comparison. Thus the law stu-
dents will be advised to consider only (E) and (F) when looking for distinguishing
factors that the defendant can use.


4.1.2 Downplaying and Emphasising Distinctions

Having identified which factors could serve as a distinction, the question arises as
to which will be the basis of good distinctions. The answer is provided by CATO’s
second innovation: the introduction of abstract factors, and the organisation of
factors into a factor hierarchy. The factor hierarchies of CATO are shown in Figure
4. Note that the plural is used because the root of a factor hierarchy is a legal issue,
and CATO recognises five issues giving rise to five hierarchies. The hierarchies
may have factors in common, but the issues are kept separate. It is important to
recognise that these hierarchies are not is-a hierarchies. Like base level factors,
abstract factors are also either present of absent in a case, and always favour the
same side. Their children are reasons for their presence (if they favour the same
side), or absence (if they favour different sides). Where there are reasons for and
against the conflict must be resolved: sometimes the resolution is obvious: for
example a waiver of confidentiality (F26) will cancel the factor F4 (Agreed not
to disclose) so that the abstract factor F121 (Express confidentiality agreement)
is not present. In other cases, such as F111 (Questionable Means), if both F26
(Deception) and F25 (Information Reverse Engineered) are present, it may be
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue   17




Fig. 4 CATO Abstract Factor Hierarchy from [10]
18                                                               T.J.M. Bench-Capon


difficult to determine whether the abstract factor is present or not. Indeed there
may be no general answer, and the particular case facts may need to be considered.
     Thus a consideration of the factor hierarchy can tell us the significance of
a distinction. If the “missing” factor has a sibling present in the case this can
be used as an alternative way of establishing the presence of the abstract factor
which represents a strength (when they favour the same side) or, when they favour
different sides, as the reason for the absence of an abstract factor which would
otherwise represent a weakness. This is how we can downplay a distinction. On
the other hand if any additional factors are no better than cousins, or even pertain
to an entirely different issue, the distinction is significant and can be emphasised.
These different ways of making and challenging distinctions were expressed as
argumentation schemes in [144].

4.1.3 Argument Moves

A third influential feature of CATO was its identification of a set of argument
moves, several based on various operations carried out in HYPO. Although other
sets of argument moves have been proposed, such as those used in CABARET
[134], the CATO set has proved enduringly useful, especially when attempting to
identify a procedure, such as [33] or when devising a dialogue game to undertake
the reasoning [143]. The argument moves used in CATO (as listed in [10], Figure
2.2) are:

 – Analogising a case to a past case with a favourable outcome;
 – Distinguishing a case with an unfavourable outcome;
 – Downplaying the significance of a decision;
 – Emphasising the significance of a distinction;
 – Citing a favourable case to emphasise strengths;
 – Citing a favourable case to argue that weaknesses are not fatal;
 – Citing a more on point counterexample to a case cited by an opponent;
 – Citing an as on point counter example to a case cited by an opponent.

     Not all of these moves are new in CATO: some can be found in HYPO. But
the third and the fourth are new - made available by the factor hierarchy - and
it is this list that is usually cited in the later work mentioned above. The moves
are also important in identifying the critical questions [141] posed when using the
argumentation schemes in [144].

4.1.4 CATO summary

CATO has been extremely influential on subsequent developments in AI and Law.
Even when HYPO is cited as the key influence, the actual approach taken often
owes as much to CATO as to HYPO. All three aspects introduced in CATO have
had influence:
 – CATO style factors, and the representation of cases as bundles of binary factors
     have been the predominant form of representation of cases in work such as
     dialogue [108], theory construction [53] and argumentation [144] and are the
     starting point for formalisations [91].
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                             19


 – The factor hierarchy and its introduction of intermediate predicates have been
   found useful in works such as [63], [25], [95] and [78]. The idea has also been
   used in work on methodologies for representing cases such as [7].
 – Argument moves, in particular the set identified by CATO, have also influenced
   AI and Law work on dialogues for reasoning about cases [143].
   Also heavily influenced by CATO, was the work of Ashley with another student,
Stefanie Brüninghaus, which continued the exploration of reasoning with Trade
Secrets law cases. This will be discussed in the next section.


4.2 IBP

Brüninghaus worked with Ashley on two projects, SMILE (SMart Index Learner )
and IBP (Issue-Based Prediction ) both of which are described in a paper included
in this special issue [21]. The two programs were supposed to act at different ends
of the case based reasoning process: SMILE would take cases input as natural
language and identify which factors were present, and then IBP would deploy
CATO style reasoning, adapted for prediction rather than teaching, to predict
the outcome of the case. Empirical evaluations are also reported in [21], showing a
strong performance from IBP, but a rather weaker performance from SMILE. Here
we will concentrate on IBP, since SMILE draws mainly on classification techniques
rather than the case based reasoning techniques we are focusing on here, albeit
that SMILE was attempting to ascribe CATO’s factors to cases.

4.2.1 Logical Model

The key modification necessary for converting CATO into a program capable of
predicting case outcomes is to combine the five issue hierarchies into a single
structure. As noted in section 4.1.2, and as is evident from Figure 4, CATO uses
five distinct hierarchies. IBP organises these using what it terms a logical model,
taken from the Restatement of Torts. This logical model is shown in Figure 5. The
logical model serves the same purpose as the top layers of rules in CABARET
[134]. Essentially the idea is that the overall question of whether a Trade Secret
was misappropriated requires both that the information was a trade secret and
that it was misappropriated. To be considered a secret, it needs to be shown both
that the information was valuable and that the owner had made efforts to maintain
its secrecy. Misappropriation could either be shown by the use of improper means
to obtain the information, or by the breach of a confidential relationship in using
the information. Thus the model has five leaf nodes, corresponding to the five
hierarchies in CATO.
    The 26 base level factors of CATO are thus split over the five issues, as indicated
in Table 2. Notice that several factors relate to two issues, and one, F3, is not used
in IBP.
    IBP will now use the factors to decide which party if favoured on each of the
issues, and then put these into the logical model to predict the outcome. The pre-
cise algorithm is given in Figure 2 of [21] in this issue, and is fully described there,
so no details are required in this introduction. One additional feature introduced
by IBP is that of strength of factors. Knock Out Factors are those “representing
20                                                                      T.J.M. Bench-Capon




Fig. 5 IBP Logical Model from [62]


 ID     Factor                              CATO Issues

 F1     DisclosureInNegotiations (d)        Confidential Relationship
 F2     BribeEmployee (p)                   Improper Means
 F3     EmployeeSoleDeveloper (d)
 F4     AgreedNotToDisclose (p)             Maintain Secrecy, Confidential Relationship
 F5     AgreementNotSpecific (d)            Defendant end of D11
 F6     SecurityMeasures (p)                Maintain Secrecy
 F7     BroughtTools (p)                    Information Used, Improper Means
 F8     CompetitiveAdvantage (p)            Information Valuable, Information Used
 F10    SecretsDisclosedOutsiders (d)       Maintain Secrecy
 F11    VerticalKnowledge (d)               Defendant end of D2
 F12    OutsiderDisclosuresRestricted (p)   Maintain Secrecy
 F13    NoncompetitionAgreement (p)         Confidential Relationship
 F14    RestrictedMaterialsUsed (p)         Information Used, Improper Means
 F15    UniqueProduct (p)                   Information Valuable
 F16    InfoReverseEngineerable (d)         Information Valuable
 F17    InfoIndependentlyGenerated (d)      Information Used, Improper Means
 F18    IdenticalProducts (p)               Information Used
 F19    NoSecurityMeasures (d)              Maintain Secrecy
 F20    InfoKnownToCompetitors (d)          Information Valuable
 F21    KnewInfoConfidential (p)            Confidential Relationship
 F22    InvasiveTechniques (p)              Improper Means
 F23    WaiverOfConfidentiality (d)         Confidential Relationship
 F24    InfoObtainableElsewhere (d)         Information Valuable
 F25    InfoReverseEngineered (d)           Information Used, Improper Means
 F26    Deception (p)                       Improper Means
 F27    DisclosureInPublicForum (d)         Information Valuable
Table 2 Mapping of Base Level Factors to Issues in IBP




behavior paradigmatically proscribed or encouraged under trade secret law and
for which the probability that a side wins when the Factor applies is at least 80%
greater than the baseline probability of the sides winning.” Conversely Weak Fac-
tors are those “for which the probability of the favored sides winning, given that
one knows the Factor applies, is less than 20% over the baseline probability of the
sides winning.” Weak factors appear to act only as supports for other factors, and
IBP will not consider an issue raised if only weak factors are present. Given that
factors can be related to points on HYPO style dimensions, it is not surprising that
differences in strength need to be considered if we are resolving issues: the use of
Knock Out and Weak factors allows this while maintaining much of the attractive
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                    21


simplicity of factors as compared with dimensions. The need to consider different
strengths of factors remains a current concern [6].



4.3 Empirical Results for IBP

Another feature of IBP was that it was given a thorough empirical evaluation
based on 184 cases (the 148 used in CATO together with another 36 analysed
specifically for IBP). This evaluation was undertaken using versions of HYPO and
CATO, a version of IBP with just the logical model, and several different machine
learning approaches in addition to IBP itself. IBP performed best with a 91.8%
success rate, and only a single abstention. The next best performer was a Rule
Learning program which achieved 88%10 . The version of CATO achieved 77% (with
22 abstentions), and HYPO 67.9% with 50 abstentions. This is, of course, a little
unfair on CATO and HYPO, since they were not designed to predict outcomes,
and the abstentions count heavily against them. In fact, HYPO gets 93.3% of the
cases for which it offers an opinion correct.


Table 3 Results, including some from [62], [65] and [7]
                           correct    error   abstain     accuracy   no-abst

 ANGELIC Secrets II             31       1          0         96.8      96.8
 ANGELIC Refined                31       1          0         96.8      96.8
 AGATHA Brute Force             30       2          0         93.7      93.7
 IBP                           170      15          1         91.4      91.9
 AGATHA A*                      29       3          0         90.6      90.6
 ANGELIC Secrets                29       3          0         90.6      90.6
 CATO-coin                     163      30          0         89.0      89.0
 Naive Bayes                   161      25          0         86.5      86.5
 HYPO-coin                     152      34          0         81.7      81.7
 ANGELIC CATO                   25       7          0         78.1      78.1
 CATO                          152      19         22         77.8      88.8
 HYPO                          127       9         50         68.3      93.4
 IBP-model                      99      15         38         72.6      86.8



    These results have been used as a basis for comparison when evaluating later
programs, including AGATHA [65], a program based on the approach of [66] in
this issue, and ANGELIC [3], a project which produced a methodology for en-
capsulating case based domains, which was applied to several domains, including
Trade Secrets. These programs were forced to use only a subset of the cases, since
the majority of the case analyses have unfortunately not been made available to
researchers, but evaluations showed them able to achieve 90+% on these cases.
The results from [3] are shown in Table 3. An earlier program based on neural
networks [32] was able to reach 98+%, on a different set of cases11 . The full set
of results for the IBP project are given as Table 3 of [21]. These results provide a
 10 This program was not part of the evaluation in [3], in which Naive Bayes with 86.5% was

the second best performer.
 11 This dataset was artificially generated, allowing for the use of a very large number (1500)

cases. The dataset has been subsequently reused in [92], [102], [143] and elsewhere.
22                                                                       T.J.M. Bench-Capon


useful benchmark for other programs attempting the task, and a success rate of
90% would seem a sensible aspiration12 .


5 Integration with Rule Based Reasoning

In the 1980s and early 1990s Case Based and Rule Based systems were some-
times seen as competing approaches (although others, including both Gardner
and Rissland, recognised that statutory interpretation (at least in the common
law traditions) would require both rules and cases). Discussion of the two ap-
proaches was held at two of the first three ICAIL conferences, in 1987, and 1991,
which was chaired by Don Berman [54]. Berman’s view seemed to be that the
two approaches had different aspirations: rule based systems were more likely to
produce practical applications, with rules derived either from statutes as in [132]
or from an expert as in [135] in which J.C. Smith expressed his understanding as
a set of rules. Berman, however, saw case based reasoning as more capable of cap-
turing legal reasoning: “A major goal of pure AI is to represent accurately human
intelligence and, therefore, to represent legal thought CBR research in the legal
domain must continue” [54]. In general Rule-based systems were associated with
Europeans, because of the widespread use of Prolog and logical representations
of legislation, inspired by the success of [132] and the prevalence of Civil Law in
continental Europe, while Case-based systems were seen as the approach of choice
of US researchers, with their preference for LISP and the presence of a highly
adversarial common law tradition. In the late eighties the two were seen (perhaps
especially in Europe) as separate approaches and research tended to be conducted
by different groups. However, exposure to each others approaches through ICAIL
and elsewhere led to a greater interest in and understanding of the position of the
“other side”. Increasingly in the 1990s practitioners of the different approaches
were now recommending integration, with both approaches required to produce
a complete system. Thus in CABARET [134] we can see rules used to provide a
top level structure in which CBR can be deployed, with an agenda mechanism
to control the processing of two co-equal CBR and RBR reasoners. CABARET
used observations and control rules to post and order tasks on the agenda: control
in CABARET is best discussed in [122]. Within the rule-based approaches, a re-
quirement for cases to provide sufficient conditions to enable interpretation of the
 12 Although just 79% was considered enough for the work reported in [9] to

make a stir in the national press and radio in the UK in October 2016: e.g
The Guardian at www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/24/artificial-intelligence-judge-
university-college-london-computer-scientists and the BBC, www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-
37727387. This perhaps a reflection of the upsurge in interest in applications of AI and
Law in the UK. See for example the 2016 Law Society of England and Wales panel at
www.youtube.com/watch?v=8jPB-4Y3jLg and a special edition of the BBC Radio 4 pro-
gramme Law in Action at www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07dlxmj. The program in [9] took
the text of published judgements from the European Court of Human Rights (i.e material
produced ex post) acting as proxies for the unavailable applications and briefs. As the authors
observe, ex ante documents would be the input to an actual prediction system. The system
produced a binary classification into violation and no violation. The task in [9] is thus more
like that of of SMILE+IBP (although SMILE was looking for individual factors rather than
the outcome) which, because of the difficulty of the SMILE task compared with the IBP task,
performs much closer to 70%. SMILE. moreover, worked on squibs, summaries of the cases,
and although these were taken from, and used the language of, the decision, did not contain
phrases related to to the outcome of the case. All websites accessed March 2017.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                               23


terms of legislation was recognised in the work of proponents of rule based systems
such as [31]13 . A very real advance in allowing the approaches to be integrated
was, however, made by [108] which provided an elegant way of moving from cases
to a set of rules. This paper will be discussed in the next section.


5.1 Central Idea of Praken and Sartor (1998)

A number of different issues are addressed in [108], but here I will focus on its most
influential idea, the movement from precedents represented as bundles of factors
to sets of rules. The main aim of the translation was to enable the precedent to
be used in a formal dialogue game, but the rules can equally be used as the basis
of an executable logic program. Once rewritten as rules, the set of precedents are
available in a form convenient for use in argumentation generally, as knowledge
bases, and as the basis of formalisations of the reasoning involved.
    The starting point is a set of cases represented as sets of factors together
with their outcome. The factors can be divided into pro-plaintiff factors and pro-
defendant factors, with each factor representing a reason to decide the case for the
side they favour. It is assumed that an additional factor for a party will always
strengthen the reasons to decide for that party. This may not be true in general
(see [105]), but is true of CATO, and can be imposed as a constraint on what is
acceptable as a factor. Now the strongest pro-plaintiff reason will be the set of all
the pro-plaintiff factors present in the case (Fp ) and the strongest pro-defendant
reason is the set of all the pro-defendant factors present in the case (Fd ). We can
express this as two rules:
   r1: Fp → p
   r2: Fd → d
   where p and d represent decisions for the plaintiff and defendant respectively.
Now the outcome of the case will indicate which of these reasons was preferred,
and so we add a rule expressing a priority between these two rules, so that

   r3: r1  r2

represents a preference for Fp over Fd , and holds if the plaintiff won the case. Each
of the precedent cases can be represent as three rules in this way, so that the whole
case base can be rewritten as a set of rules to find for the plaintiff, a set of rules
to find for the defendant, and an incomplete set of preferences between them. The
result is a knowledge base with many similarities to the Reason Based Logic of
Hage [83] and [84], further developed with his student Bart Verheij [138] and [140],
but the timing and simplicity of the technique of [108], together with its strong
connection to case based reasoning systems, meant that it made a more lasting
impression on the AI and Law community.
    The major limitation with the resulting knowledge base is that many possible
rule conflicts will not be resolved by the priorities derived from the precedents. As
noted in [4], the 26 factors of CATO, split evenly as they are between plaintiff and
defendant, give rise to more than 8000 sets of factors favouring each of the sides,
 13 In many ways this is just a return to the very early approach of [72] which began with

rules, but which turned to cases when “the rules ran out”.
24                                                                  T.J.M. Bench-Capon


and in excess of 67 million potential comparisons. Even allowing for subsumption
of proper subsets, the number of required priorities to ensure that a conflict can
be resolved with precedential authority will exceed the cases available (and most
probably all the cases that have ever been decided). There is, however, a desire
to go beyond what is contained in the set of precedent cases, so that we can
say something about cases which are not decidable a fortori with respect to the
precedents. In [108] this is achieved through rule broadening, allowing one or more
factors to be removed from the antecedent, but then maintaining the priority of
the original rule as established in the case from which it derived. The problem is
that this lacks justification, unless or until endorsed by the judges in an actual
case. Essentially, if the precedent does not provide a definitive answer, it can
be distinguished by pointing to a factor missing from the plaintiff rule, or an
additional factor in the rule in the precedent, and we need to rely on the user to
say whether the distinction blocks the argument or not. Broadening, and several
kinds of distinction, are fully discussed in [108]. Although this is a difficult problem,
addressed differently in [91], discussed in the following subsubsection, and in the
value based theory construction approaches described in section 6, the techniques
of [108] at least enable a clean expression of the problem and potential solutions
to it.


5.2 Formalisation of Precedential Reasoning

Although [108] provides a formal dialogue game which can be regarded as a formal-
ization of the aspects of legal theories on judicial reasoning discussed in that paper,
it is very much tied to the dialogical context, and so to a process of argumentation.
Horty’s main aim was to answer the question How is it, exactly, that precedents con-
strain future decisions?, and attempts to give a logic of precedent. Horty pursued
this through a series of papers beginning with [87], moving through [88], [89] and
[90] to its culmination in the paper included in this special issue, [91]. Horty is
motivated by a desire to counter the arguments of [14]. As Horty explains in [88],
Alexander (who is working in Law rather than AI and Law) had identified three
different models of precedent:
 – the natural model, by which “a precedent decision might figure into the reason-
   ing of a court in its attempt to reach the correct decision in a current case; but
   on the natural model, this is the extent of precedential constraint” (p19);
 – the rule model : by which precedents include a “rule that carries the precedential
   constraint. Constraint by precedent is just constraint by rules; a constrained
   court must apply the rules of precedent cases in reaching current decisions ...
   There is no room for narrowing the rule, or distinguishing the current case
   from the precedent;” (p20);
 – the result model by which “a precedent controls all and only a fortiori cases -
   that is, all and only those cases that are as least as strong for the winning side
   of the precedent as the precedent case itself.” (p20).
    In [88] Horty wishes to defend the result model against the rule model ad-
vocated by Alexander. Both Horty and Alexander reject the natural model. To
defend the result model, Horty draws extensively on AI and Law research, citing
amongst others, [18] and [19], [10] and [108].
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                  25




Fig. 6 Factor Lattice for domain with 3 pro-P and 3 pro-D factors. Given a precedent with
all six factors present decided for the plaintiff, the plaintiff rule can be given the narrow
interpretation of [108], or several broad interpretations as in [91], one of which is shown.



    The main idea of Horty is to represent precedents in rules, in much the same
way as [108], but with one very important difference. Suppose the case was decided
for the plaintiff. Now the defendant’s reason, in both [108] and [91] will be the
strongest possible, that is the set of all pro-defendant factors present in the case,
but the plaintiff’s reason is treated differently. Whereas in [108] it is the strongest
pro-plaintiff reason, that is all the pro-plaintiff factors present in the case, Horty
reasons that a weaker reason may have been enough to defeat the defendant. Thus
the plaintiff rule in [91] can be a subset of the factors present in the case favouring
the winner. The makes the resulting rule stronger, because it constrains future
cases to a greater extent. The effect is the same as rule broadening, but is is done
at the theory level rather than the case level, and is supposed to apply to all the
cases in the case base. The situation is illustrated using the pictorial notation of
[34] (which followed [108] in using narrow preferences) in Figure 6.
    The figure shows a Factor Lattice for a domain with six factors: three pro-
plaintiff and three pro-defendant. These are grouped into two lattices one pro-
plaintiff and one pro-defendant. These contain every possible combination of fac-
tors favouring the appropriate party, arranged in a partial order embodying the
assumption that more factors beat fewer factors. A precedent provides a link be-
tween one node from each lattice, and so enables comparison between sets of factors
from the two different lattices. Thus a narrow interpretation of the precedent with
all six factors decided for the plaintiff, (shown in Figure 6) will indicate a prefer-
ence for {P1, P2, P3} over {D1 D2 D3}. This will not constrain any of the subsets.
There are, however, several broad interpretations possible in the manner of [91]:
any of the two member or single member sets could be said to be preferred to
{D1 D2 D3}, one of which, {P3}, is shown in Figure 6. This means that {P3} is
26                                                                 T.J.M. Bench-Capon


preferred to every combination of pro-defendant factors (since {D1 D2 D3} is pre-
ferred to every subset). Now only three pro-plaintiff subsets ({P1,P2}, {P1} and
{P2}) are not constrained, and so await future decisions. For example a case with
factors {P1, P2, D1} would, if decided for the defendant, now fully determine all
subsequent cases. This would incidentally mean that {P3} was preferred to {P1,
P2}, but this is not significant, since these subsets are never competing.
    With these mechanisms Horty can formally characterise what it is for a case
base with the given (broad or less broad) interpretations to be consistent. Now
cases must be decided so as to maintain consistency of the case base: this may
constrain the outcome, or just how broad the rule taken for the winner of the
case can be. The open question is how the subset of pro-winner factors is to be
determined. Horty does not specify this, although one suggestion might be that it
should be the ratio deciendi of the case (see [60]), which can often be discovered by
an examination of the text of the decision. Horty also envisages the subset being
determined when the precedent is decided. A possible alternative might be that
the theory is built anew for each new case, the constraint being that a consistent
theory explaining the previous precedents would need to be produced. This might
well, especially when there are relatively few precedents available, lead to some
considerable revision of the rules to be taken from the precedent cases, but as
the number of precedents increases the scope to revise rules while maintaining
consistency with cases already decided will decrease. This view of reasoning with
cases has some strong similarities with the theory construction approaches found
in [98] and [53], and with the notion of a life cycle of case law found in [94] in
which a period of turbulence is followed by a period of stability.
    Horty is the starting point for [110], who likes the rule based representation of
cases, especially because it is able to maintain the venerable distinction between
ratio deciendi and obiter dicta. Rigoni associates Horty’s broadened rules with ratio
deciendi. Rigoni, however, offers a number of improvements to Horty’s account.
First he allows for multiple rules to be associated with a single precedent in order to
handle over-determined cases. This would also allow the incorporation of obiter dicta.
Second he recognises that not all precedents serve the same purpose: identifying a
class of precedents he calls framework cases. His example of a framework precedent
is Lemon v. Kurtzman 14 . Rigoni summarises the case:
     In that case the US Supreme Court addressed the question of whether
     Pennsylvania’s and Rhode Island’s statutes that provided money to reli-
     gious primary schools subject to state oversight violated the Establishment
     Clause of the First Amendment. The court introduced a three-pronged test
     and ultimately ruled that both programs did violate the Establishment
     Clause.
    Rigoni’s insight is that not all precedents express preferences: some rather
supply tests which provide a framework for deciding the cases, in a manner similar
to the use of the statute in CABARET and the Restatement of Torts in CATO.
The three pronged test can thus be seen as three issues to be considered in Lemon ’s
domain. Rigoni provides a way of accommodating framework cases in a Horty-style
formalisation. For Rigoni’s approach, the reader is referred to Rigoni’s paper in
this special issue.
14   Lemon v. Kurtzman 403 U.S. 602 (1971).
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                           27


    It is a feature of HYPO and CATO that all the precedent cases play the same
role: to express a preference or, in HYPO, to constrain the n-dimensional space
in some way. Thus cases are analysed against a framework of dimensions and fac-
tors developed with respect to the whole set of cases. In practice, however, the
dimensions, factors and issues have developed over time, and some of the cases
that introduced a factor, issue or dimension may well be in the case base. For ex-
ample, if we consider the cases related to the Automobile Exception to the Fourth
Amendment described in [115], [38] and [7], we see that no mention was made
of privacy issues in the case which is seen as introducing the exception, Carroll
v US 15 . The need to consider privacy is stressed in South Dakota v. Opperman 16 .
Thus the issue of privacy must have been introduced in Opperman, or some earlier
framework precedent. The much discussed Califormia v Carney 17 , which, especially
in the oral argument ([115], [22] and [2]) was important for its identification of the
factors needed to distinguish between an automobile being used as a vehicle and
an automobile being used as a residence. This was extensively discussed in the
Oral Argument for that case ([115], [2]) and a number of new factors made their
way into the decision. Such factors are rarely considered as present in previous
cases, and so it may be a mistake to analyse earlier cases in terms of dimensions,
factors and issues introduced subsequently. Understanding a body of cases as a
sequence, although the topic of [86] and [128], is perhaps a topic which merits fur-
ther exploration. Keeping a representation current in the face of changes in case
law is also explored in [5].



5.3 Argumentation Schemes

The motivation for expressing a set of precedents as rules in [108] was so that the
precedents could be used to deploy arguments in a dialogue game. At the time,
following [73], dialogue games were a popular way of expressing legal procedures,
such as particular forms of legal argumentation. Since their introduction to explain
fallacies in propositional logic [85] and [96], such games handed tended to be built
on an underlying rule base. An excellent overview of such systems is given in [106].
As this century has progressed, however, the use of dialogue games has tended to
make way for argumentation schemes [141] and [142]. Although argument schemes
had been used before in AI and Law: arguably the three ply argumentation of
HYPO is a scheme, CABARET certainly uses schemes and Toulmin’s argumen-
tation scheme [137] was widely used (e.g [97]), often to drive dialogues as in [45],
explicit use of argumentation schemes moved to the forefront when Walton’s un-
derstanding of them in terms of premises, conclusions and critical questions, as
expressed in [141], became prevalent.
    A particular argumentation scheme (originally designed for value based practi-
cal reasoning) was applied to reasoning with legal cases in [81], and argumentation
schemes were used to model a particular case in [75]. The explicit use of CATO’s
argumentation moves was carried out in [144]. These schemes were used to model
particular cases in [39], and formalised, further developed and extended to include
15 Carroll v. United States, 267 U.S. 132 (1925).
16 South Dakota v. Opperman, 428 U.S. 364 (1976).
17 California v. Carney, 471 U.S. 386 (1985).
28                                                                         T.J.M. Bench-Capon


dimensions in [145], [29] and [109]. The last of these, in particular, offers a set of
schemes designed to model HYPO/CATO style reasoning in a formal framework,
ASPIC+ [101].


6 Purposes and Values

HYPO and CATO, as mentioned above treat all their cases as homogeneous.
Whether considered as bundles of facts or bundles of factors, they are abstracted
from all aspects of context. There is no consideration of the level of court, or the
jurisdiction. Thus the HYPO cases ranged across a number of different states. Nor
was there any consideration of date or sequence. HYPO cases ranged from 1845
to 1980, although the majority dated from the nineteen sixties and seventies [19].
This should not be seen as a defect: there is no reason why an AI model has to
cover every aspect, and classroom discussions often use cases in the context in-
dependent fashion18 . The intention of HYPO was to model one necessary part of
actual appellate reasoning, and so it is not fair to complain that it is not sufficient
in the real world. This aspect of HYPO was the subject of a series of critiques
by Don Berman and Carole Hafner, who noted the absence of procedural context
[55], consideration of purpose [56], and temporal aspects [57]. These papers were
consolidated in a paper in a special issue of this journal (10:1-3) in memory of Don
Berman [82]. Even though HYPO was not intended to address these aspects, it is
important to tell (some) computer scientists that HYPO is not the whole of the
story, and to explore how these aspects can be represented to augment the basic
HYPO approach. These critiques were a little slow in being taken up, but mean-
while within the computational argumentation community interest was growing in
Perelman’s notion of an audience [103]. This had been the subject of [80] and was
integrated with Dung’s argumentation frameworks [70] in [36]. This led to a revis-
iting of the ideas of [56], which had argued that the preferences between factors
reflected the purposes attributed to the law. These could change across times and
jurisdictions [67], and so explain why similar cases might be decided differently
at different times and in different places. As such the resolution of the conflicts
could be seen as relative to the audiences to which the laws and arguments were
addressed, and could be made computational using the formal characterisation of
audiences in [36], that is as an ordering of the social values to which the arguments
related, by equating the notion of purpose with the promotion of social values as
in [37] and [41].


6.1 Value Based Theory Construction

Interest in [56] and examination of the purpose of laws, interpreted as the values
they were intended to promote and protect, was revived by a group of three articles
that appeared in Artificial Intelligence and Law, volume 10 numbers 1-3: [35], [104]
 18 In fact the influential critique in [56] was focused on three cases: Pierson v Post (New York,

1805), Keeble v Hickergill (an English Queen’s Bench case from 1707) and Young v Hitchens
(an English Queen’s Bench case of 1844). The critique is itself thus made using three cases
from different jurisdictions, with very different dates, presented out of sequence. None the less
these cases are often used when teaching property law in the US.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                          29




Fig. 7 Value Based Theory Construction from [52]



and [129]. Following this Sartor and Bench-Capon developed the ideas in a series of
papers, including [51] and [52], culminating in [53]. These papers gave an account of
theory construction with disagreements resolved according to the value preferences
of the audience (here society, as represented by the judges).
    The overall idea is shown in Figure 7. The starting point is at the bottom left
where we have a set of cases (described as bundles of factors) and their outcomes.
These outcomes reveal preferences between sets of factors, which will explain the
case outcomes. The preferences are essentially the priority rules of [108]. Each
factor is associated with a value: a value that will be promoted by deciding the
case for the side favoured by that factor. This enables us to rewrite sets of factors
as sets of values, and transfer the preferences to these sets of values. The heart of
the theory is this set of value preferences. This takes us to the top of the diagram,
and we have constructed a theory and so we can start to apply the theory and
work our way down the right hand side. The value preferences determine and
explain preferences between sets of factors which are not to be found in the existing
precedents. These preferences can then be used to determine the outcomes of as
yet undecided cases which have these sets of factors.
    The theories are constructed using a set of operators, defined in [53]. The
theory starts from nothing and construction begins by including a case from the
background. This will bring with it a set of factors and their associated values.
Each factor is associated with a simple rule stating that the factor is a reason to
decide for the side favoured by the factor. The theory can then be extended by
including more cases, combining simple rules into rules with multiple antecedents
and establishing preferences between rules and between values. This continues until
the theory can be applied to give an outcome for the case under consideration.
At this point the onus moves to the other party who must attempt to extend
30                                                               T.J.M. Bench-Capon


the theory to produce a better theory with an outcome for its favoured side,
whereupon, it is again the turn of the original side. This process of extending
and refining the theory continues until there is no possible extension of the theory
which changes the outcome. The paper illustrates the process with the wild animals
cases introduced in [56]. The paper also includes a discussion of how the theory
operators relate to the argument moves of CATO.
    This approach was tested empirically in [66] (included in this issue) and [65].
The paper included in this special issue explored the use of CATE (CAse Theory
Editor) in a series of experiments intended to explore a number of issues relating
to the theories constructed using the operators of [53], including how the theories
should be constructed, how sets of values should be compared, and the represen-
tation of cases using structured values (which are akin to dimensions) as opposed
to factors. In CATE, the construction of theories is done by the user, supported
by the CATE toolset. The second paper described AGATHA (Argument Agent
for Theory Automation) which is designed to automate the theory construction
process, by constructing the theory first as a search over the space of possible
theories, and then as a two player dialogue game (which could be played with the
AGATHA program playing both sides). A set of search operators and argument
moves are defined in terms of the theory constructors and the resulting theories are
evaluated according to their explanatory power and their simplicity. The search or
game continues until it is not possible to produce a better theory. Several search
methods were investigated: brute force and heuristic search using A* and adver-
sarial search using α/β pruning. The results proved to be good: they were reported
in [65]:
     AGATHA produces better theories that the hand constructed theories re-
     ported in [66], and theories comparable in explanatory power to the best
     performing reported technique, IBP [21]. Note also that AGATHA can
     be used even when there is no accepted structural model of the domain,
     whereas IBP relies on using the structure provided by the Restatement of
     Torts.
     Table 3 of this introduction includes the results of some versions of AGATHA.


6.2 Other Uses of Values

Apart from their pivotal role in the approach to theory construction advocated
in [51], values have been applied to case based reasoning in several other ways.
Their original use, to tailor an argumentation framework to the preferences of an
audience using Value based Argumentation Frameworks (VAF) [36] was applied
to reasoning with cases in [25], [144] and [26], but recent work by Atkinson and
her colleagues has placed moved away from this use of values in [4] and [8]. They
continue to use the VAF approach for legislative law making and e-democracy [28],
[27] and [42], and in the justification of norms [47].
    Values have also been used for reasoning with cases in [16], which recognised
that values could be used to justify rules (their traditional role in VAF based
systems) and also the inclusion of particular antecedents in rules, and in [78],
from which developed a different formalism intended to capture dynamic aspects
of reasoning with legal cases [79]. The most recent work in this strand is [77].
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                             31


Finally, another approach to using values in the representation of cases can be
found in [139].
    One issue relating to values that has yet to be fully explored is that it seems
that they can be used in a variety of ways. Sometimes they appear to give rise
to conflicting positions which can be resolved by preferring one value to another,
which is essentially the approach of VAF based systems, At others they appear to
be better regarded a sets of reasons, for which issues such as accrual are pertinent
([105], [100] and [49], which seems applicable in domains such as US Trade Secrets,
when a number of different aspects of the case must be considered. Also, however,
there seem to be situations where a balance ([93] and [76]) must be struck between
two values: it cannot be said that one is preferred to another, but rather both
must be respected to an appropriate degree. This is perhaps the case with the
Automobile Exception cases, where a balance must be struck between exigency
and privacy, [48]. Unpicking these different aspects is something that AI and Law
may need to address in future work.


7 Back to Dimensions

The work we have been discussing has tended to adopt CATO’s version of factors,
features either present or absent and always favouring the same side, rather than
HYPO’s dimensions, which represent a range of values, and may favour either side
according to where on the dimension the case lies. This is understandable and the
use of such factors is a very sensible simplification for the purpose which CATO
was intended to address, the teaching of distinguishing cases. Although there are
other sensible simplifications (see, for example, [124]), CATO’s notion of factors
has been widely adopted and this has enabled understanding of reasoning with
legal cases to make the significant progress represented by the papers included
in this special issue. It remains the case, however, that factors do represent a
simplification and so, if we are to make further progress, it will be necessary to
improve our understanding of dimensions. The differences between dimensions and
factors are discussed in [117] in this special issue: in the next section I will look at
some more recent attempts to make use of dimensions.


7.1 Factors and Dimensions

In the Restatement of Torts (quoted in [25]) we find (italics mine):
   Some factors to be considered in determining whether given information
   is ones trade secret are: 1. the extent to which the information is known
   outside of his business; 2. the extent to which it is known by employees
   and others involved in his business; 3. the extent of measures taken by him
   to guard the secrecy of the information; 4. the value of the information to
   him and to his competitors; 5. the amount of effort or money expended by
   him in developing the information; 6. the ease or difficulty with which the
   information could be properly acquired or duplicated by others.
  Although we can identify all of these “factors to consider” with factors in
CATO, the language here is, as the italicised phrases show, not really consistent
32                                                                 T.J.M. Bench-Capon


with the all or nothing, present or absent, nature of CATO-style factors. Each of
them seems to require some kind of quantitative estimate of how much?. Thus F16,
ReverseEngineerable, a CATO factor which has presented a number of difficulties for
subsequent systems attempting to use CATO’s analysis, such as that reported in
[3], cries out for a more nuanced representation. Reverse Engineerable could mean
that a person could build a version after a cursory inspection, or could require
many person years of expert effort. Arguably, anything is reverse engineerable
with sufficient effort, expertise and ingenuity. There are three ways in which issues
requiring dimensions can arise:
1. Whether the facts favour the plaintiff or defendant: if a hunter is chasing a
   wild animal, how close does he have to get to count as possessing the animal?
   The famous case of Pierson v Post turned on precisely this point, as discussed
   in [50].
2. Whether the factor should or should not be ascribed to the case: at what level
   of effort does a product cease to be considered reverse engineerable?
3. In comparisons: for example, thinking in terms of values, is the weak promotion
   of a preferred value to be preferred to the strong promotion of a lesser value
   [130]? This issue is also explored empirically in [66], and more recently in [6].
    The first two of these concern what can be argued about. When using factors,
the decisions are made by the analyst and once made cannot be debated when
attempting to resolve the case. (1) is effectively decided when defining the factors:
thus whether Justinian, who demands actual physical possession for the animal to
count as caught should be chosen over other authorities who make less stringent de-
mands, such as mortal wounding or certain capture, is something that the analyst
needs to be told along with the existence of caught as a factor. Once the definition
has been chosen, ascription to cases is relatively easy. (2) relates to the analysis of
particular cases. Given that the information was not in fact reverse engineered (in
which case F25 would apply instead), the analyst must decide whether “the ease
or difficulty with which the information could be properly acquired or duplicated
by others” is such that F16 can be deemed to be present. (3) rather concerns com-
putation, and allows mapping onto numbers to facilitate accrual and comparison.
We need to be able to argue about whether a factor applies to a case and which
side is favoured, but using CATO-style factors these issues are resolved by the
analyst and so outside the scope of systems which begin with cases represented as
bundles of factors.


7.2 Current Use of Dimension for Computation

The computation aspect is key in [66]. The main concern in that paper is values,
but there is a section on what it terms structured values. The 26 CATO factors are
associated with one of five values: CA for respect for confidentiality agreements,
QM for questionable methods used by the defendant, LM for legitimate methods
used by the defendant, RE for reasonable efforts to maintain secrecy of the part of
the plaintiff, and MW for material worth of the information.. A structured value
runs from an extreme pro-plaintiff point to an extreme pro-defendant point, and
the various CATO factors relating to the value are assigned positions along this
line according to how strongly they promote or demote the value. They are thus
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                     33


Table 4 Dimensions in [6], Their Values and Their Factors.
         Agreement   Dubious    Legitimate   Measures   Worth    Disclosure   Availability
            CA        QM           LM          RE       MW          RE           LM
    10      F4         F22                     F6        F8
    9                  F2
    8       F13        F26         F7                      F7       F12
    7       F21        F14
    6       F14                                            F18                    F15
    5
    4                                                               F1
    3       F5                     F25                     F16                    F20
    2
    1       F23                    F17                              F10
    0                              F3          F19         F11      F27           F24




dimensions in all but name. The values can themselves be ordered, and to the
contribution of the factor becomes a function of the importance of the value and
the extent to which the particular factor promotes it. The empirical consequences
of the additional degrees of freedom this enables are given as part of the results
in [6]19 and Table 3 of this paper.
    This approach is also adopted in [43] which provides dimensions for the wild
animal cases of [56] and [6] which applies the same process to CATO’s factors. In
[6] seven dimensions are used rather than the five structured values of [66], and
the dimension runs from 10 (extreme pro-plaintiff) to 0 (extreme pro-defendant)
rather than from +10 to -10, as used by [66].
    The seven dimensions in [6] are:
 – Agreement: This relates to the existence of explicit confidentiality and non-
   disclosure agreements.
 – Dubious: This considers whether the means used by the defendant were illegal
   or otherwise dubious or questionable
 – Legitimate This covers the independent discovery of the information.
 – Measures: This relates to the security measures used by the plaintiff.
 – Worth: This relates to the value of the information, in terms of the time and
   effort that it might save, and the value it would add to the defendant’s product.
 – Disclosure: This relates to the number of people to whom the information and
   been disclosed and the circumstances of such disclosures.
 – Availability: This considers how readily available the information was to the
   defendant.
The distribution of the 26 CATO factors is shown in Table 4.
    These dimensions allowed computation of predictions of case outcomes using
propositions with truth values between 0 and 1 to represent the dimension points,
and interpreting the logical operators in the manner of fuzzy logic [146], as pro-
posed in [46]. The results of the dimensional version of Angelic Secrets reported
in [6] showed an improvement on previously reported versions which had used
boolean factors [3]. This seemed to centre in particular on a better handling of
the vague factor F16, reverse engineerability. Two other cases with factors which
it had been suggested in [7] were wrongly ascribed, were wrongly decided by the
 19 Several papers cited in this section report work carried out by Latifa Al-Abdulkarim as

part of her PhD project [1]. This project developed the ANGELIC (ADF for kNowledGe
Encapsulation of Legal Information from Cases) methodology, which was applied to several
domains including US Trade Secrets (Angelic Secrets) and the wild animals cases (Angelic
Animals).
34                                                                       T.J.M. Bench-Capon


program, but when the factors in these cases were corrected in the ways suggested
in that earlier paper a success rate of 96.8% was achieved. This suggests that it
is possible to achieve better results if we allow for degrees of support, rather than
insisting on the all or nothing choices required by the use of factors. Note, how-
ever, that even with the dimensional approach of [6], the description of the cases in
terms of factors/dimensions is still a matter for the analyst: it cannot be disputed
within the program. This relates to issues (1) and (2) above and will be discussed
in section 7.3. Note, however, that that there is no obligation for the computer
system to cover the whole process: as discussed in [8] a system may be scoped so
as to start with factors or dimensions. It may be preferable to allow an analyst
to represent the case in terms of dimensions and factors rather than attempt to
enable their derivation from the brute facts. There is a degree of trade off here:
see also [20] and the commentary on it by Thorne McCarty in [40].
    The use of dimensions can also be used to generate case narratives, as described
in [43], using methods akin to the scripts of [131]. These narratives can then be
used to recast the story of the case in terms of legally significant facts, and to
support improved explanations20 .


7.2.1 Comparison with HYPO dimensions

The seven dimensions used in [6] are somewhat different from those used in the
original HYPO program as reported in [19]. This should come as no surprise: [6]
was able to draw on three decades of work on representations of US Trade Secrets,
above all CATO, but also the work of [21] and [66]. Table 5 shows the relation
between the two sets of dimensions. In some cases we see several of HYPO’s dimen-
sions arranged on same Angelic dimension: confidentiality, for example embraces
four of HYPO’s (binary) dimensions. In contrast, the dimensions relating to the
acquisition of the information seem underrepresented in HYPO, and the dimension
Availability, corresponds to none of HYPO’s dimensions, and so is omitted from
Table 5. These differences are probably because the cases introduced in CATO
contained several cases which related to this issue. HYPO, in contrast, contained
a number of cases relating to the validity of agreements: the older cases related to
validity of contracts not specifically associated with Trade Secrets. This is reflected
in HYPO’s dimensions, in particular include the notion of consideration, which re-
lates specifically to the validity of any agreements and does not feature in either
CATO or Angelic Secrets (where an agreement without consideration simply does
not appear as a factor).


7.3 Dimensions as a Bridge to Facts

The transition from the facts of a case as reported using “world facts” to a set of
legally significant “legal facts” has long been as issue in AI and Law, at least since
[61]. The difficulty is that the world facts are diverse and peculiar to particular
cases, whereas the legal facts exhibit more uniformity and have a more definite
 20 This also revives an idea from the past: for example [123] discussed recurring prototypical

fact patterns or legal stories in terms of legal scripts. Schank himself was an invited speaker
at the second ICAIL (1989).
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                            35


Table 5 Dimensions in [6] and [19]
        Confidentiality    Dubious                   Security      Material
                                        OK Means                                  Disclosure
        Agreement          Means                     Measures      Worth
        CA                 QM           LM           RE            MW             RE
        Agreed                                                                    Secrets
                                                                   Competitive
   10   Not                                          Security                     Disclosed
                                                                   Advantage(P)
        To Disclose                                  Measures(P)                  Outsiders(P)
                           Bribe                                   Vertical
   9
                           Employee                                Knowledge(P)
        Non                                                                       Outsider
                                                                   Brought
   8    competition                                                               Disclosures
                                                                   Tools
        Agreement                                                                 Restricted(P)
   7
   6
   5
                                                                                  Disclosure
   4
                                                                                  In Negotiations
        Agreement
   3    Not
        Specific
   2
                                                                                  Outsider
                                                                   Vertical
   1                                                                              Disclosures
                                                                   Knowledge(D)
                                                                                  Restricted(D)
                                        Employee                                  Secrets
                                                     Security      Competitive
   0    No Consideration                Sole                                      Disclosed
                                                     Measures(D)   Advantage(D)
                                        Developer                                 Outsiders(D)




Table 6 Summary of Statement Types. Base Level Factors, Legal Facts and Factual Conclu-
sions all Correspond to Ranges on Dimensions
    Statement Type                   “Truth” Value     Justification
    Verdict                V         0, 1              Entailed by II/LI
    Intermediate Issue     II        0,1               Entailed by LI
    Leaf Issue             LI        0,1               af ∈ AF Sufficiently favours Plaintiff
    Abstract Factor        AF        -1 .... 1         Deduced from BF
    Base Level Factor      BF        -1 .... 1         Mapped from LI
    Legal Fact             LF        0,1               if ∈ F C meets Proof Standard
    Factual Conclusion     FC        0 ...1            Entailed by IF
    Intermediate Fact      IF        0 ... 1           Derived from E
    Evidence               E         1                 Given



relation to the issues to decided. It is often said that once the world facts have been
qualified into legal facts, the decision itself is often obvious. This clearly relates
to issues (1) and (2) from section 7.1. Both these questions need to be able to be
made the subject of argument.
    As can be seen from the use of structured values in [66] and the Tables in this
paper, especially Table 4, factors can be regarded as points (or ranges) on dimen-
sions. So the first move is to see the legal facts of a case as a bundle of dimension
points. Then a case description can be seen as a frame with slots corresponding to
dimensions and fillers as points/ranges of those dimensions. This is precisely the
structure advocated in [43] and [6]. It is also the method of representing cases in
[109] to enable argumentation about the how the factors present in a case relate
to facts and dimensions.
    The matter is made more explicit in [8], which distinguishes various types of
statements in the journey from evidence to verdict, with a particular emphasis
of how we can move from the world facts to the legal facts. It is important not
to confuse issues of fact and issues of law. Table 6 shows the different types of
statement used in that paper.
    Note that the points/ranges on dimensions play three roles. First, they are the
conclusion of the reasoning about the world, and the input to the legal reasoning.
36                                                               T.J.M. Bench-Capon


Thus we start with a mass of evidence from which we need to arrive at a set
of well structured legal facts which will relate to the law governing the case. As
such they are typically not certain but established with a certain degree of belief.
The methods used here will be the standard ways in which people reason about
the world: evidence takes many forms: witness testimony, documents, forensics,
video footage etc. Each of these are associated with their own kind of reasoning,
coherence [58], probability [136], etc, and the courts should make use of these
established ways of reasoning. There is nothing distinctively legal in this phase,
and the decisions are often made by lay juries, and often facts cannot be revisited
at the Appeal stage. At his point the appropriate standard of proof ([71] and [74])
is applied. The appropriate proof standard will depend on the jurisdiction and the
nature of the case: typically criminal cases impose a higher standard of proof than
civil cases.
    Those factual conclusions that meet the required standards become legal facts.
At this point they become either true or false: all factual conclusions that meet
the proof standard are “equally true”: the question is not the extent to which they
are believed, but whether they are believed sufficiently to be taken as true in the
legal reasoning. This is the bridge between the world and realm of law: the proof
standard is the toll which gives entry to the bridge. On leaving the bridge the
legal facts assume their third role: they become base level factors. As such they
again become associated with a number: 1 for extreme pro-plaintiff factors, -1 for
extreme pro-defendant factors and somewhere in between otherwise. Note that the
number is entirely independent of the degree of belief with the factual conclusion
was established: the base level factor number is determined by the dimension and
the position of the factor on that dimension. Conflation of these roles can lead
to problems: perhaps applying the standard of proof during legal reasoning, or
allowing the degree of belief to contaminate the contribution of the factor.
    All this is quite recent work and nothing like the consensus about, let alone the
understanding of, reasoning with CATO-style factors has emerged with respect to
dimensions. None the less, this is an active area of work, and points to a direction
which may serve to enhance our understanding of reasoning with legal cases.


8 Conclusion

Reasoning with legal cases has been a central concern of AI and Law since its
earliest days. As can be seen from the papers in this special issue and the many
other papers referred to in this introduction, HYPO and it descendants - espe-
cially CATO - have had an enormous influence, setting the agenda for a variety
of investigations carried out by different groups over three decades. As a result,
the role of legal cases in moving from legal facts through intermediate concepts
to issues and a final verdict is relatively well understood and has been formalised
in [91] and [110]. Also it has given rise to implementations which have performed
well in empirical evaluations, capable of predicting case outcomes in more than
90% of cases, as shown in [21] and [66].
    All of this, however, has used CATO-style factors, and so has dealt with factors
as present or absent, all or nothing, and so does not capture nuances associated
with degrees of presence and degrees of support: the kind of factors suggested
by the language used in the Restatement of Torts. This has led to a refocus of
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                37


HYPO’s original mode of representation, using dimensions, which does allow for
these notions.
   There are currently a number of open questions which we would expect to be
pursued in the near and middle future. These include:
 – Can we modify formalisations of the sort found in [91] to accommodate factors
   associated with magnitudes, rather than just binary true and false?
 – [91] is concerned with comparing sets of factors. What about cases where fac-
   tors need to be balanced?
 – Can we use dimensions to be more precise about the transition from world
   facts to legal facts?
 – Can we exploit the structure of cases into dimensions and points/ranges on
   these dimensions when reasoning about evidence?
 – What roles can precedents have? We have seen that there are precedents in-
   dicating preferences, precedents providing a framework of issues as in [110],
   and tentatively identified precedents which introduced additional factors. Are
   there others?
 – What is the role of purposes and values? If values can play several roles, as
   suggested in section 6, how can these be distinguished, and how do they relate?
   These are some of the questions that will need to be answered if reasoning
with cases in the manner associated with HYPO and its successors is to be further
developed. Thus HYPO will continue to inspire work in AI and Law for years to
come.


Acknowledgments

I am very grateful to Edwina Rissland, Kevin Ashley and Katie Atkinson, for their
invaluable comments on a earlier draft. Needless to say, errors that remain are all
my own. I am also grateful to all the members of the AI and Law community, too
numerous to mention individually, with who I have worked on, and talked about,
reasoning with legal cases over the past thirty years.


References

  1. L. Al-Abdulkarim. Representation of case law for argumentative reasoning. PhD thesis,
     University of Liverpool, 2016.
  2. L. Al-Abdulkarim, K. Atkinson, and T. Bench-Capon. From oral hearing to opinion in
     the US Supreme Court. In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 2013:
     The Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference,, pages 1–10, 2013.
  3. L. Al-Abdulkarim, K. Atkinson, and T. Bench-Capon. Evaluating the use of Abstract
     Dialectical Frameworks to represent case law. In Proceedings of the 15th International
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 156–160. ACM, 2015.
  4. L. Al-Abdulkarim, K. Atkinson, and T. Bench-Capon. Factors, issues and values: Re-
     visiting reasoning with cases. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
     Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 3–12. ACM, 2015.
  5. L. Al-Abdulkarim, K. Atkinson, and T. Bench-Capon. Accommodating change. Artif.
     Intell. Law, 24(4):409–427, 2016.
  6. L. Al-Abdulkarim, K. Atkinson, and T. Bench-Capon. Angelic secrets: bridging from
     factors to facts in US Trade Secrets. In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems -
     JURIX 2016: The Twenty-Ninth Annual Conference, pages 113–118, 2016.
38                                                                       T.J.M. Bench-Capon


 7. L. Al-Abdulkarim, K. Atkinson, and T. Bench-Capon. A methodology for designing
    systems to reason with legal cases using Abstract Dialectical Frameworks. Artificial
    Intelligence and Law, 24(1):1–49, 2016.
 8. L. Al-Abdulkarim, K. Atkinson, and T. Bench-Capon. Statement types in legal argument.
    In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 2016: The Twenty-Ninth Annual
    Conference, pages 3–12, 2016.
 9. N. Aletras, D. Tsarapatsanis, D. Preoţiuc-Pietro, and V. Lampos. Predicting judicial
    decisions of the European Court of Human Rights: A natural language processing per-
    spective. PeerJ Computer Science, 2: DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.93, 2016.
10. V. Aleven. Teaching case-based argumentation through a model and examples. PhD
    thesis, University of Pittsburgh, 1997.
11. V. Aleven. Using background knowledge in case-based legal reasoning: a computational
    model and an intelligent learning environment. Artificial Intelligence, 150(1-2):183–237,
    2003.
12. V. Aleven and K. D. Ashley. What law students need to know to win. In Proceedings
    of the 4th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 152–161.
    ACM, 1993.
13. V. Aleven and K. D. Ashley. Doing things with factors. In Proceedings of the 5th
    International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 31–41. ACM, 1995.
14. L. Alexander. Constrained by precedent. Southern California Law Review, 63:1–64, 1989.
15. M. Allen, T. Bench-Capon, and G. Staniford. A multi-agent legal argument generator.
    In Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems
    Applications, pages 1080–1084. IEEE, 2000.
16. M. Araszkiewicz. Analogy, similarity and factors. In Proceedings of the 13th International
    Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 101–105. ACM, 2011.
17. M. Araszkiewicz, A. Lopatkiewicz, A. Zienkiewicz, and T. Zurek. Representation of an
    actual divorce dispute in the parenting plan support system. In Proceedings of the 15th
    International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 166–170. ACM, 2015.
18. K. D. Ashley. Toward a computational theory of arguing with precedents. In Proceedings
    of the 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 93–102.
    ACM, 1989.
19. K. D. Ashley. Modeling legal arguments: Reasoning with cases and hypotheticals. MIT
    press, Cambridge, Mass., 1990.
20. K. D. Ashley. Ontological requirements for analogical, teleological, and hypothetical legal
    reasoning. In Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
    and Law, pages 1–10. ACM, 2009.
21. K. D. Ashley and S. Brüninghaus. Automatically classifying case texts and predicting
    outcomes. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 17(2):125–165, 2009.
22. K. D. Ashley, C. Lynch, N. Pinkwart, and V. Aleven. A process model of legal argument
    with hypotheticals. In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems: JURIX 2015: The
    Twenty-First Annual Conference, pages 1–10, 2008.
23. K. D. Ashley and E. L. Rissland. But, see, accord: generating blue book citations in
    hypo. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
    Law, pages 67–74. ACM, 1987.
24. K. Atkinson. Introduction to special issue on modelling Popov v. Hayashi. Artificial
    Intelligence and Law, 20(1):1–14, 2012.
25. K. Atkinson and T. Bench-Capon. Legal case-based reasoning as practical reasoning.
    Artificial Intelligence and Law, 13(1):93–131, 2005.
26. K. Atkinson and T. Bench-Capon. Argumentation and standards of proof. In Proceedings
    of the 11th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 107–116.
    ACM, 2007.
27. K. Atkinson, T. Bench-Capon, D. Cartwright, and A. Wyner. Semantic models for
    policy deliberation. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Artificial
    Intelligence and Law, pages 81–90. ACM, 2011.
28. K. Atkinson, T. Bench-Capon, and P. McBurney. PARMENIDES: facilitating delibera-
    tion in democracies. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 14(4):261–275, 2006.
29. K. Atkinson, T. Bench-Capon, H. Prakken, and A. Wyner. Argumentation schemes for
    reasoning about factors with dimensions. In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems
    - JURIX 2013: The Twenty-Sixth Annual Conference, pages 39–48, 2013.
30. J. L. Austin and G. J. Warnock. Sense and sensibilia. Oxford University Press, Oxford,
    1962.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                      39


 31. T. Bench-Capon. Practical legal expert systems: the relation between a formalisation of
     law and expert knowledge. Computers, Law and AI, pages 191–201, 1991.
 32. T. Bench-Capon. Neural networks and open texture. In Proceedings of the 4th Interna-
     tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 292–297. ACM, 1993.
 33. T. Bench-Capon. Arguing with cases. In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems -
     JURIX 1997: The Tenth Annual Conference, pages 85–100, 1997.
 34. T. Bench-Capon. Some observations on modelling case based reasoning with formal argu-
     ment models. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     and Law, pages 36–42. ACM, 1999.
 35. T. Bench-Capon. The missing link revisited: The role of teleology in representing legal
     argument. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 10(1-3):79–94, 2002.
 36. T. Bench-Capon. Persuasion in practical argument using value-based argumentation
     frameworks. Journal of Logic and Computation, 13(3):429–448, 2003.
 37. T. Bench-Capon. Try to see it my way: Modelling persuasion in legal discourse. Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, 11(4):271–287, 2003.
 38. T. Bench-Capon. Relating values in a series of supreme court decisions. In Legal Knowl-
     edge and Information Systems - JURIX 2011: The Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference,
     pages 13–22, 2011.
 39. T. Bench-Capon. Representing Popov v Hayashi with dimensions and factors. Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, 20(1):15–35, 2012.
 40. T. Bench-Capon, M. Araszkiewicz, K. Ashley, K. Atkinson, F. Bex, F. Borges,
     D. Bourcier, P. Bourgine, J. G. Conrad, E. Francesconi, et al. A history of AI and
     Law in 50 papers: 25 years of the International Conference on AI and Law. Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, 20(3):215–319, 2012.
 41. T. Bench-Capon, K. Atkinson, and A. Chorley. Persuasion and value in legal argument.
     Journal of Logic and Computation, 15(6):1075–1097, 2005.
 42. T. Bench-Capon, K. Atkinson, and A. Wyner. Using argumentation to structure e-
     participation in policy making. In Transactions on Large-Scale Data-and Knowledge-
     Centered Systems XVIII, pages 1–29. Springer, 2015.
 43. T. Bench-Capon and F. Bex. Cases and stories, dimensions and scripts. In Legal Knowl-
     edge and Information Systems: JURIX 2015: The Twenty-Eighth Annual Conference,
     volume 279, pages 11–20. IOS Press, 2015.
 44. T. Bench-Capon, J. B. Freeman, H. Hohmann, and H. Prakken. Computational models,
     argumentation theories and legal practice. In C. Reed and T. Norman, editors, Argu-
     mentation Machines, pages 85–120. Springer, 2003.
 45. T. Bench-Capon, T. Geldard, and P. Leng. A method for the computational modelling
     of dialectical argument with dialogue games. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 8(2-3):233–
     254, 2000.
 46. T. Bench-Capon and T. Gordon. Two tools for prototyping legal CBR. In Legal Knowl-
     edge and Information Systems - JURIX 2015: The Twenty-Eighth Annual Conference,
     pages 177–178, 2015.
 47. T. Bench-Capon and S. Modgil. Norms and value based reasoning: justifying compliance
     and violation. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 25(1):1–36, 2017.
 48. T. Bench-Capon and H. Prakken. Using argument schemes for hypothetical reasoning in
     law. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 18(2):153–174, 2010.
 49. T. Bench-Capon, H. Prakken, and W. Visser. Argument schemes for two-phase demo-
     cratic deliberation. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, pages 21–30. ACM, 2011.
 50. T. Bench-Capon and E. Rissland. Back to the future: Dimensions revisited. In Legal
     Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 2001, pages 41–52, 2001.
 51. T. Bench-Capon and G. Sartor. Using values and theories to resolve disagreement in law.
     In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 1997: The Thirteenth Annual
     Conference, pages 73–84, 2000.
 52. T. Bench-Capon and G. Sartor. Theory based explanation of case law domains. In
     Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages
     12–21. ACM, 2001.
 53. T. Bench-Capon and G. Sartor. A model of legal reasoning with cases incorporating
     theories and values. Artificial Intelligence, 150(1):97–143, 2003.
 54. D. H. Berman. Developer’s choice in the legal domain: the Sisyphean journey with CBR
     or down hill with rules (a working paper for the case-rules panel at the third International
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law). In Proceedings of the 3rd International
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 307–309. ACM, 1991.
40                                                                      T.J.M. Bench-Capon


55. D. H. Berman and C. D. Hafner. Incorporating procedural context into a model of case-
    based legal reasoning. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Artificial
    Intelligence and Law, pages 12–20. ACM, 1991.
56. D. H. Berman and C. D. Hafner. Representing teleological structure in case-based legal
    reasoning: The missing link. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on
    Artificial intelligence and Law, pages 50–59, 1993.
57. D. H. Berman and C. D. Hafner. Understanding precedents in a temporal context of
    evolving legal doctrine. In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Artificial
    Intelligence and Law, pages 42–51. ACM, 1995.
58. F. Bex. Arguments, stories and criminal evidence: A formal hybrid theory, volume 92.
    Springer, Dordrecht, 2011.
59. L. K. Branting. Reasoning with portions of precedents. In Proceedings of the 3rd Inter-
    national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 145–154. ACM, 1991.
60. L. K. Branting. A computational model of ratio decidendi. Artificial Intelligence and
    Law, 2(1):1–31, 1993.
61. J. Breuker and N. Den Haan. Separating world and regulation knowledge: where is the
    logic. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
    Law, pages 92–97. ACM, 1991.
62. S. Bruninghaus and K. D. Ashley. Predicting outcomes of case based legal arguments.
    In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law,
    pages 233–242. ACM, 2003.
63. S. Bruninghaus and K. D. Ashley. A predictive role for intermediate legal concepts. In
    Legal Knowledge and Information Systems: JURIX 2003: the Sixteenth Annual Confer-
    ence, pages 153–162. IOS Press, 2003.
64. J. P. Callan, W. B. Croft, and S. M. Harding. The INQUERY retrieval system. In
    Database and expert systems applications, pages 78–83. Springer, 1992.
65. A. Chorley and T. Bench-Capon. Agatha: Using heuristic search to automate the con-
    struction of case law theories. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 13(1):9–51, 2005.
66. A. Chorley and T. Bench-Capon. An empirical investigation of reasoning with legal
    cases through theory construction and application. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 13(3-
    4):323–371, 2005.
67. G. Christie. The notion of an ideal audience in legal argument. Springer, Law and
    Philsophy Library, volume 45. Dordrecht, 2000.
68. J. G. Conrad and J. Zeleznikow. The role of evaluation in AI and Law: an examination
    of its different forms in the AI and Law journal. In Proceedings of the 15th international
    conference on artificial intelligence and law, pages 181–186. ACM, 2015.
69. J. J. Daniels and E. L. Rissland. Finding legally relevant passages in case opinions. In
    Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages
    39–46. ACM, 1997.
70. P. M. Dung. On the acceptability of arguments and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic
    reasoning, logic programming and n-person games. Artificial Intelligence, 77(2):321–357,
    1995.
71. A. M. Farley and K. Freeman. Burden of proof in legal argumentation. In Proceedings
    of the 5th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 156–164.
    ACM, 1995.
72. A. Gardner. An Artificial Intelligence Approach to Legal Reasoning. MIT press, Cam-
    bridge, Mass., 1987.
73. T. F. Gordon. The Pleadings Game. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 2(4):239–292, 1993.
74. T. F. Gordon and D. Walton. Proof burdens and standards. In Argumentation in (A.
75. T. F. Gordon and D. Walton. Pierson vs. Post revisited - A reconstruction using the
    Carneades argumentation framework. In Computational Models of Argument: Proceed-
    ings of COMMA 2006, pages 208–219, 2006.
76. T. F. Gordon and D. Walton. Formalizing balancing arguments. In Computational
    Models of Argument - Proceedings of COMMA 2016, pages 327–338, 2016.
77. M. Grabmair. Predicting trade secret case outcomes using argument schemes and learned
    quantitative value effect tradeffs. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on
    Artificial Intelligence and Law. ACM, In Press, 2017.
78. M. Grabmair and K. D. Ashley. Facilitating case comparison using value judgments
    and intermediate legal concepts. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on
    Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 161–170. ACM, 2011.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                     41


 79. M. Grabmair and K. D. Ashley. Using event progression to enhance purposive argumen-
     tation in the value judgment formalism. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 73–82. ACM, 2013.
 80. F. Grasso, A. Cawsey, and R. Jones. Dialectical argumentation to solve conflicts in
     advice giving: a case study in the promotion of healthy nutrition. International Journal
     of Human-Computer Studies, 53(6):1077–1115, 2000.
 81. K. Greenwood, T. Bench-Capon, and P. McBurney. Towards a computational account
     of persuasion in law. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, pages 22–31. ACM, 2003.
 82. C. D. Hafner and D. H. Berman. The role of context in case-based legal reasoning:
     teleological, temporal, and procedural. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 10(1-3):19–64,
     2002.
 83. J. Hage. Monological reason-based logic: a low level integration of rule-based reasoning
     and case-based reasoning. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, pages 30–39. ACM, 1993.
 84. J. Hage. A theory of legal reasoning and a logic to match. Artificial Intelligence and
     Law, 4(3-4):199–273, 1996.
 85. C. L. Hamblin. Fallacies. Methuen, London, UK, 1970.
 86. J. Henderson and T. Bench-Capon. Dynamic arguments in a case law domain. In
     Proceedings of the 8th international conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages
     60–69. ACM, 2001.
 87. J. F. Horty. Precedent, deontic logic, and inheritance. In Proceedings of the 7th Inter-
     national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 63–72. ACM, 1999.
 88. J. F. Horty. The result model of precedent. Legal Theory, 10(1):19–31, 2004.
 89. J. F. Horty. Reasons and precedent. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
     on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 41–50. ACM, 2011.
 90. J. F. Horty. Rules and reasons in the theory of precedent. Legal Theory, 17(1):1–33,
     2011.
 91. J. F. Horty and T. J. Bench-Capon. A factor-based definition of precedential constraint.
     Artificial Intelligence and Law, 20(2):181–214, 2012.
 92. B. Johnston and G. Governatori. Induction of defeasible logic theories in the legal domain.
     In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law,
     pages 204–213. ACM, 2003.
 93. M. Lauritsen. On balance. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 23(1):23–42, 2015.
 94. E. H. Levi. An introduction to legal reasoning. The University of Chicago Law Review,
     15(3):501–574, 1948.
 95. L. Lindahl and J. Odelstad. Intermediaries and intervenients in normative systems.
     Journal of Applied Logic, 6(2):229–250, 2008.
 96. J. D. Mackenzie. Question-begging in non-cumulative systems. Journal of Philosophical
     Logic, 8(1):117–133, 1979.
 97. C. C. Marshall. Representing the structure of a legal argument. In Proceedings of the
     2nd international conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 121–127. ACM,
     1989.
 98. L. T. McCarty. An implementation of Eisner v. Macomber. In Proceedings of the 5th
     International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 276–286. ACM, 1995.
 99. B. McLaren and K. Ashley. Case representation, acquisition, and retrieval in sirocco. In
     International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning, pages 248–262. Springer, 1999.
100. S. Modgil and T. Bench-Capon. Integrating dialectical and accrual modes of argumen-
     tation. In Computational Models of Argument: Proceedings of COMMA 2010, pages
     335–346, 2010.
101. S. Modgil and H. Prakken. The ASPIC+ framework for structured argumentation: a
     tutorial. Argument & Computation, 5(1):31–62, 2014.
102. M. Možina, J. Žabkar, T. Bench-Capon, and I. Bratko. Argument based machine learning
     applied to law. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 13(1):53–73, 2005.
103. C. Perelman and L. Olbrechts-Tyteca. The New Rhetoric: A Treatise on Argumentation.
     University of Notre Dame Press, Indiana, 1971.
104. H. Prakken. An exercise in formalising teleological case-based reasoning. Artificial In-
     telligence and Law, 10(1-3):113–133, 2002.
105. H. Prakken. A study of accrual of arguments, with applications to evidential reasoning.
     In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law,
     pages 85–94. ACM, 2005.
42                                                                       T.J.M. Bench-Capon


106. H. Prakken. Formal systems for persuasion dialogue. The Knowledge Engineering Review,
     21(02):163–188, 2006.
107. H. Prakken and G. Sartor. A dialectical model of assessing conflicting arguments in legal
     reasoning. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 4(3-4):331–368, 1996.
108. H. Prakken and G. Sartor. Modelling reasoning with precedents in a formal dialogue
     game. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 6(3-4):231–87, 1998.
109. H. Prakken, A. Wyner, T. Bench-Capon, and K. Atkinson. A formalization of argu-
     mentation schemes for legal case-based reasoning in ASPIC+. Journal of Logic and
     Computation, 25(5):1141–1166, 2015.
110. A. Rigoni. An improved factor based approach to precedential constraint. Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, 23(2):133–160, 2015.
111. E. L. Rissland. Example generation. In Third Biennial Conference of the Canadian
     Society for Computational Studies of Intelligence, pages 280–288, 1980.
112. E. L. Rissland. Examples in legal reasoning: Legal hypotheticals. In Proceedings of the
     8th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 90–93, 1983.
113. E. L. Rissland. The ubiquitous dialectic. In Proceedings of the Sixth European Conference
     on Artificial Intelligence, pages 367–372, 1984.
114. E. L. Rissland. AI and legal reasoning. In Proceedings of the 9th International Joint
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence-Volume 2, pages 1254–1260. Morgan Kaufmann
     Publishers Inc., 1985.
115. E. L. Rissland. Dimension-based analysis of hypotheticals from supreme court oral argu-
     ment. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
     Law, pages 111–120. ACM, 1989.
116. E. L. Rissland and K. D. Ashley. A case-based system for trade secrets law. In Proceedings
     of the 1st International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 60–66.
     ACM, 1987.
117. E. L. Rissland and K. D. Ashley. A note on dimensions and factors. Artificial Intelligence
     and Law, 10(1-3):65–77, 2002.
118. E. L. Rissland and J. J. Daniels. A hybrid CBR-IR approach to legal information retrieval.
     In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law,
     pages 52–61. ACM, 1995.
119. E. L. Rissland and J. J. Daniels. The synergistic application of CBR to IR. Artificial
     Intelligence Review, 10(5-6):441–475, 1996.
120. E. L. Rissland and D. B. Skalak. Combining case-based and rule-based reasoning: A
     heuristic approach. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Joint Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, pages 524–530, 1989.
121. E. L. Rissland and D. B. Skalak. Interpreting statutory predicates. In Proceedings of
     the 2nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 46–53. ACM,
     1989.
122. E. L. Rissland and D. B. Skalak. Cabaret: rule interpretation in a hybrid architecture.
     International Journal of Man-Machine Studies, 34(6):839–887, 1991.
123. E. L. Rissland, D. B. Skalak, and M. T. Friedman. Bankxx: a program to generate
     argument through Case-Base research. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
     on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 117–124. ACM, 1993.
124. E. L. Rissland, D. B. Skalak, and M. T. Friedman. Bankxx: Supporting legal arguments
     through heuristic retrieval. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 4(1):1–71, 1996.
125. E. L. Rissland, D. B. Skalak, and M. T. Friedman. Evaluating a legal argument program:
     The bankxx experiments. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 5(1-2):1–74, 1997.
126. E. L. Rissland and E. Soloway. Overview of an example generation system. In Proceedings
     of the 1st Annual National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 256–258, 1980.
127. E. L. Rissland, E. M. Valcarce, and K. D. Ashley. Explaining and arguing with examples.
     In Proceedings of the Fourth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 288–294.
     AAAI Press, 1984.
128. E. L. Rissland and X. Xu. Catching gray cygnets: an initial exploration. In Proceedings
     of the 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 151–160.
     ACM, 2011.
129. G. Sartor. Teleological arguments and theory-based dialectics. Artificial Intelligence and
     Law, 10(1-3):95–112, 2002.
130. G. Sartor. Doing justice to rights and values: teleological reasoning and proportionality.
     Artificial Intelligence and Law, 18(2):175–215, 2010.
HYPO’S Legacy: Introduction to the Virtual Special Issue                                     43


131. R. Schank and R. Abelson. Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding, An Inquiry into
     Human Knowledge Structures. Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, 1977.
132. M. J. Sergot, F. Sadri, R. A. Kowalski, F. Kriwaczek, P. Hammond, and H. T. Cory. The
     British Nationality Act as a logic program. Communications of the ACM, 29(5):370–386,
     1986.
133. D. B. Skalak and E. L. Rissland. Argument moves in a rule-guided domain. In Proceedings
     of the 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law, pages 1–11. ACM,
     1991.
134. D. B. Skalak and E. L. Rissland. Arguments and cases: An inevitable intertwining.
     Artificial Intelligence and Law, 1(1):3–44, 1992.
135. J. Smith and C. Deedman. The application of expert systems technology to case-based
     law. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
     Law, pages 84–93. ACM Press, New York, 1987.
136. S. T. Timmer, J.-J. C. Meyer, H. Prakken, S. Renooij, and B. Verheij. A structure-
     guided approach to capturing bayesian reasoning about legal evidence in argumentation.
     In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law,
     pages 109–118. ACM, 2015.
137. S. Toulmin. The Uses of Argument. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, England,
     1958.
138. B. Verheij. Arguments and defeat in argument-based nonmonotonic reasoning. In Por-
     tuguese Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 213–224. Springer, 1995.
139. B. Verheij. Formalizing value-guided argumentation for ethical systems design. Artificial
     Intelligence and Law, 24(4):387–407, 2016.
140. B. Verheij, J. C. Hage, and H. J. Van Den Herik. An integrated view on rules and
     principles. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 6(1):3–26, 1998.
141. D. Walton. Argumentation Schemes for Presumptive Reasoning. Lawrence Erlbaum
     Associates: Mahwah, New Jersey, 1996.
142. D. Walton, C. Reed, and F. Macagno. Argumentation schemes. Cambridge University
     Press: Cambridge, England, 2008.
143. M. Wardeh, T. Bench-Capon, and F. Coenen. Padua: a protocol for argumentation
     dialogue using association rules. Artificial Intelligence and Law, 17(3):183–215, 2009.
144. A. Wyner and T. Bench-Capon. Argument schemes for legal case-based reasoning. In
     Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 2013: The Twentieth Annual Con-
     ference, pages 139–149, 2007.
145. A. Wyner, T. Bench-Capon, and K. Atkinson. Towards formalising argumentation about
     legal cases. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     and Law, pages 1–10. ACM, 2011.
146. L. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets. Information and Control, 8(3):338–353, 1965.
