OFFERING CIRCULAR

                             The Hellenic Republic
          €600,000,000 2.085 per cent. Inflation Linked Notes due 25 July 2057
   (to be consolidated and form a single issue with the €1,000,000,000 2.085 per cent.
 Inflation Linked Notes due 25 July 2057 issued by the Hellenic Republic on 30 March
                                          2007)

            Issue Price: 94.60 per cent. of the principal amount of the Notes
        (plus an amount equal to 115 days’ accrued interest from, and including
                      1 April 2008, to, but excluding 25 July 2008)

The €600,000,000 2.085 per cent. Inflation Linked Notes due 25 July 2057 (the “Notes”) (to
be     consolidated     and    from    a    single    issue     with   the   €1,000,000,000
2.085 per cent. Inflation Linked Notes due 25 July 2057 issued by the Hellenic Republic (the
“Republic”) on 30 March 2007) will bear interest from, and including, 1 April 2008 and
interest will be payable annually in arrear on each Interest Payment Date (see “Terms and
Conditions of the Notes – Interest”). The first payment of interest will be paid on
25 July 2008 in respect of the period from, and including, 1 April 2008 to, but excluding,
25 July 2008. Payments of interest in respect of the Notes will be made without deduction for
or on account of Greek taxes, as described, and subject to the exceptions set out, under
“Terms and Conditions of the Notes - Taxation”.

The Notes will mature on the Interest Payment Date falling on 25 July 2057.

This Offering Circular neither constitutes a prospectus pursuant to Part II of the Luxembourg
law on prospectuses for securities (loi relative aux prospectus pour valeurs mobilières) dated
10 July 2005 (the “Luxembourg Prospectus Law”) (which implements the Directive
2003/71/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 November 2003 (the
“Prospectus Directive”)) nor a simplified prospectus pursuant to Chapter 2 of Part III of the
Luxembourg Prospectus Law. Accordingly, this Offering Circular does not purport to meet
the format and the disclosure requirements of the Prospectus Directive and Commission
Regulation (EC) No 809/2004 implementing the Prospectus Directive, and it has not been,
and will not be, submitted for approval to any competent authority within the meaning of the
Prospectus Directive and in particular the Supervisory Commission of the Financial Sector
(Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier), in its capacity as competent authority
under the Luxembourg Prospectus Law. The Notes, issued pursuant to this Offering Circular,
will therefore not qualify for the benefit of the single European passport pursuant to the
Prospectus Directive.

Save in the certain limited circumstances described herein, Notes in definitive form will not
be issued in exchange for the Permanent Global Note.

The Notes will initially be represented by a temporary global note (the “Temporary Global
Note”), without interest coupons, which will be deposited on or about 1 April 2008 (the
“Closing Date”) with a common safekeeper for Euroclear Bank SA/NV (“Euroclear”) and
Clearstream Banking, société anonyme (“Clearstream, Luxembourg”). Interests in the
Temporary Global Note will be exchangeable for interests in a permanent global note (the
“Permanent Global Note” and, together with the Temporary Global Note, the “Global
Notes”), without interests coupons, on or after 11 May 2008 (the “Exchange Date”), upon
certification as to non-U.S. beneficial ownership. Save in the certain limited circumstances
described herein, Notes in definitive form will not be issued in exchange for the Permanent
Global Note.

The Notes are intended to be held in a manner which will allow Eurosystem eligibility. This
simply means that the Notes are intended upon issue to be deposited with one of the ICSDs as
common safekeeper and does not necessarily mean that the Notes will be recognized as
eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy and intra-day credit operations by the
Eurosystem either upon issue or at any or all time during their life. Such recognition will
depend upon satisfaction of the Eurosystem eligibility criteria.

                                         Managers

Goldman Sachs International        EFG Eurobank Ergasias           National Bank of Greece



                    The date of this Offering Circular is 28 March 2008.




                                                                                      Page 2
The Republic confirms that it has taken all reasonable care to ensure that all information
contained in this Offering Circular with regard to the Republic and the Notes is in every
material respect true and accurate and not misleading and to the best of its knowledge and
belief there are no other facts the omission of which would make any statement in the
Offering Circular misleading in any material respect in the context of the issue and sale of the
Notes. The Republic accepts responsibility accordingly.

The Managers (as defined under “Subscription and Sale”) have not separately verified the
information contained herein. Accordingly, no representation, warranty or undertaking,
express or implied, is made and no responsibility or liability is accepted by the Managers as
to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this Offering Circular or any
other information provided by the Republic in connection with the Notes or their distribution.

No person is or has been authorised to give any information or to make any representation
which is not contained in, or which is not consistent with, this Offering Circular or any other
information supplied by or on behalf of the Republic in connection with the Notes and, if
given or made, such information or representation must not be relied upon as having been
authorised by the Republic or the Managers.

Neither this Offering Circular nor any other information supplied in connection with the
Notes (i) is intended to provide the basis of any credit or other evaluation or (ii) should be
considered as a recommendation or constituting an invitation or offer by the Republic that
any recipient of this Offering Circular should purchase any Notes. Each investor
contemplating purchasing any Notes should make its own independent investigation of the
financial condition and affairs, and its own appraisal of the creditworthiness, of the Republic.

Prospective investors should be aware that the interest payable on the Notes is determined in
accordance with a formula linked to the HICP (as described below) and is therefore variable.
Neither the current nor the historical value of the HICP should be taken as an indication of
future performance of the HICP during the term of the Notes.

The delivery of this Offering Circular does not at any time imply that the information
contained herein concerning the Republic is correct at any time subsequent to the date hereof
or that any other information supplied in connection with the issue of the Notes is correct as
of any time subsequent to the date indicated in the document containing the same.

The distribution of this Offering Circular and the offer or sale of Notes may be restricted by
law in certain jurisdictions. The Republic and the Managers do not represent that this
document may be lawfully distributed or that the Notes may be lawfully offered, in
compliance with any applicable registration or other requirements in any such jurisdiction,
or pursuant to an exemption available thereunder, or assume any responsibility for
facilitating any such distribution or offering. In particular, no action has been taken by the
Republic or the Managers which would permit a public offering of the Notes or distribution of
this document in any jurisdiction where action for that purpose is required. Accordingly, the
Notes may not be offered or sold, directly or indirectly, and neither this Offering Circular nor
any advertisement or other offering material may be distributed or published, in any
jurisdiction except under circumstances that will result in compliance with any applicable
laws and regulations. Persons into whose possession this Offering Circular or any Notes
come must inform themselves about, and observe, any such restrictions.

The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the United States Securities Act of
1933, as amended, (the “Securities Act”) and may not be offered or sold in the United States
or to U.S. persons except in a transaction that is exempt from or not subject to any
registration requirements. As a result, the Notes are only being offered pursuant to offers and




                                                                                          Page 3
sales in compliance with Regulation S under the Securities Act (“Regulation S”). (See
“Subscription and Sale”).

In addition, there are restrictions on the distribution of this Offering Circular and the offer or
sale of Notes in the United States and the United Kingdom (see “Subscription and Sale”).

In this Offering Circular, unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires,
references to “€” or “euro” are to the currency introduced at the start of the third stage of
European Economic and Monetary Union pursuant to the Treaty establishing the European
Community (as amended from time to time).

In connection with the issue of the Notes, Goldman Sachs International (or persons acting
on its behalf) (the “Stabilising Manager”), may over-allot (provided that the aggregate
principal amount of Notes allotted does not exceed 105 per cent. of the aggregate amount
of the Notes) Notes or effect transactions with a view to supporting the market price of
the Notes at a level higher than that which might otherwise prevail. However, there is no
assurance that the Stabilising Manager (or persons acting on its behalf) will undertake
stabilisation action. Any stabilisation action may begin on or after the date of adequate
public disclosure of the terms of the offer of the Notes and, if begun, may be ended at any
time, but it must end no later than 30 days after the Closing Date. Any stabilisation action
or over-allotment shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable laws and rules.




                                                                                            Page 4
                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                 Page

Terms and Conditions of the Notes ......................................................................................... 6
Summary of provisions relating to the Notes while in global form ..................................... 19
Use of Proceeds ..................................................................................................................... 21
Greek Taxation ...................................................................................................................... 22
Subscription and Sale ............................................................................................................ 23
General Information .............................................................................................................. 25




                                                                                                                                  Page 5
                    TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES

There follows the text of the Terms and Conditions to which (subject to completion and
amendment) the Notes will be subject:

The €600,000,000 2.085 per cent. Inflation Linked Notes due 25 July 2057 (the “Notes”) (to
be     consolidated     and    from    a   single    issue    with     the   €1,000,000,000
2.085 per cent. Inflation Linked Notes due 25 July 2057 issued by the Hellenic Republic (the
“Republic”) on 30 March 2007) are issued pursuant to (a) article 1 of L. 2187/94, as in force,
article 31 of Law 1914/1990, Laws 2628/98 (for the establishment of the Public Debt
Management Agency (PDMA)), 2682/99 and 3091/2002 and (b) Ministerial Decisions
2/44514/004 dated 16 June 1999 and published on 7 July 1999 of the Minister of Finance and
238/0094/3 January 2005 of the Minister of Economy and Finance. Payments in respect of the
Notes will be made pursuant to a supplemental agency agreement dated 28 March 2008 which
restates and amends an agency agreement originally entered into on 29 March 2007 (together,
with amendments of 18 December 2007, the Agency Agreement) and made between the
Republic, Citibank, N.A. as principal paying agent and agent bank (the “Agent”, which
expression shall include any successor agent) and Dexia Banque Internationale à
Luxembourg, société anonyme as Luxembourg paying agent (the “Paying Agent”, together
with the Agent, the “Paying Agents”, which expression shall include any successor paying
agents).

The Noteholders and the Couponholders (each as defined below) are entitled to the
benefit of a Deed of Covenant (the “Deed of Covenant”) dated 28 March 2008 and made
by the Republic.

Copies of the Agency Agreement and the Deed of Covenant are available for inspection,
during normal business hours at the specified offices of each of the Paying Agents. The
Noteholders and the Couponholders are deemed to have notice of, and are entitled to the
benefit of, all the provisions of the Deed of Covenant and the Agency Agreement which
are binding on them.

Words and expressions defined in the Agency Agreement shall have the same meanings
where used in these Terms and Conditions unless the context otherwise requires or unless
otherwise stated and provided that, in the event of inconsistency between the Agency
Agreement and these Terms and Conditions, these Terms and Conditions will prevail.
Any reference herein to “Noteholders” shall mean the holders of the Notes and any
reference herein to “Couponholders” shall mean the holders of the Coupons (as defined
below).

1.      FORM, DENOMINATION AND TITLE

The Notes are in bearer form and in the denomination of €1,000,000 (the “Specified
Denomination”). Any definitive Notes are issued with interest coupons for the payment
of interest (the “Coupons”) attached.

Subject as provided below, title to the Notes and Coupons will pass by delivery. The
Republic and each of the Paying Agents may deem and treat the bearer of any Note or
Coupon as the absolute owner thereof (whether or not overdue and notwithstanding any
notice of ownership or writing thereon or notice of any previous loss or theft thereof) for
all purposes.

For as long as any of the Notes are represented by a global note held on behalf of
Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V. (“Euroclear”) and Clearstream Banking, société anonyme




                                                                                        Page 6
(“Clearstream, Luxembourg”), each person (other than Euroclear or Clearstream,
Luxembourg) that is for the time being shown in the records of Euroclear or Clearstream,
Luxembourg, as the holder of a particular nominal amount of such Notes (in which regard
any certificate or other document issued by Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg as to
the nominal amount of such Notes standing to the account of any person shall be conclusive
and binding for all purposes save in the case of manifest error) shall be treated by the
Republic and any Paying Agent as the holder of such nominal amount of such Notes for all
purposes other than with respect to the payment of principal or interest on the Notes, for
which purpose the bearer of the relevant global Note shall be treated by the Republic and
any Paying Agent as the holder of such Notes in accordance with and subject to the terms
of the relevant global Note (and the expressions “Noteholder” and “holder of Notes” and
related expressions shall be construed accordingly). Notes which are represented by a
global Note will be transferable only in accordance with the rules and procedures for the
time being of Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.

2.      STATUS OF THE NOTES AND NEGATIVE PLEDGE

The Notes constitute direct, general, unconditional, unsubordinated and, subject to this
Condition, unsecured obligations of the Republic. The Notes rank pari passu with all
other unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Republic outstanding on
28 March 2008 or issued thereafter without any preference granted by the Republic to one
above the other by reason of priority of date of issue, currency of payment, or otherwise.
The due and punctual payment of the Notes and the performance of the obligations of the
Republic with respect thereto is backed by the full faith and credit of the Republic. So
long as any Note remains outstanding, the Republic shall not create or permit to subsist any
mortgage, pledge, lien or charge upon any of its present or future revenues, properties or
assets to secure any External Indebtedness, unless the Notes shall also be secured by such
mortgage, pledge, lien or charge equally and rateably with such External Indebtedness or by
such other security as may be approved by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders (as
described in Condition 10).

“External Indebtedness” means existing or future indebtedness for borrowed money of
the Republic (i) expressed or payable or optionally payable in a currency other than the
lawful currency of the Republic (including any guarantees given by the Republic for any
existing or future indebtedness for borrowed money of any other person which
indebtedness is expressed or payable or optionally payable in a currency other than the
lawful currency of the Republic) or (ii) borrowed from or initially placed with a foreign
institution or person under a contract governed by the laws of a jurisdiction other than the
Republic (including any guarantees given by the Republic for any existing or future
indebtedness for borrowed money of any other person which is borrowed from or initially
placed with a foreign institution or person under a contract governed by the laws of a
jurisdiction other than the Republic).

3.      INTEREST

(1)     Interest Rate and Interest Payment Dates

The Notes bear interest from, and including, 1 April 2008 (the “Commencement
Date”) and interest will be payable annually in arrear on 25 July in each year (each an
“Interest Payment Date”). The first Interest Payment Date, with regard to the Notes offered
herein, will be 25 July 2008 in respect of the period from, and including, 1 April 2008 to, but
excluding, 25 July 2008. Interest will be payable in respect of each Interest Period
(which expression shall mean the period from, and including, the Commencement Date
to, but excluding, the first Interest Payment Date and each successive period from, and




                                                                                         Page 7
including, an Interest Payment Date to, but excluding, the next succeeding Interest
Payment Date).

(2)      Interest Accrual

Each Note will cease to bear interest from and including its due date for redemption unless,
upon due presentation, payment of the principal in respect of the Note is improperly withheld
or refused or unless default is otherwise made in respect of payment. In such event, interest
will continue to accrue until whichever is the earlier of: the date on which all amounts due in
respect of such Note have been paid; and five days after the date on which the full amount of
the moneys payable in respect of such Notes has been received by the Agent and notice to
that effect has been given to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 11.

(3)      Interest Rate

The Notes will bear interest calculated by the Agent Bank in accordance with the following
provisions:

Interest payable in respect of each Note on each Interest Payment Date = 2.085 per cent.
per annum x Index Ratio on the relevant Interest Payment Date x Principal Amount of that
Note (€1,000,000), provided that such amount of interest shall not be less than zero. The
interest payable on the first Interest Payment Date shall be equal to an amount calculated in
respect of the period from, and including, the Commencement Date to, but excluding, the first
Interest Payment Date.

“Commencement Date” means 1 April 2008.

“Daily Inflation Reference Index” means in relation to a day (D) in any given month (M),
the linear interpolation of the HICP for the third month preceding such month (M-3) and the
second month preceding such month (M-2) expressed relative to the same base of 100 and
calculated in accordance with the following formula:

Daily Inflation Reference Index as of
                   NBD − 1
D = HICP m − 3 +           x (HICP m − 2 − HICPm − 3)
                    NDM

where:

HICP M-2 = The HICP for Month M-2

HICP M-3 = The HICP for Month M-3

NBD = Number of days since the start of month M

NDM = Number of days in month M

The Daily Inflation Reference Index will be rounded to five decimal places.

“HICP” means the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices, excluding tobacco, for the euro
zone produced by Eurostat under Article 121 of the Treaty of Amsterdam (109j of the Treaty
of      European        Union)     and      published    on    Eurostat’s    web       site
(http://www.europa.eu.int/comm/eurostat/)                                               at:
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page?_pageid=1996,39140985&_dad=portal&_schema




                                                                                         Page 8
=PORTAL&screen=detailref&language=en&product=EUROIND&root=EUROIND/shorties/
euro_cp/cp240

The HICP for any month is determined as at the date of its first publication, notwithstanding
any subsequent changes to it. Any revised level of HICP for any month will be taken into
account when calculating the level of HICP for the month following the official
announcement of the change.

“Index Ratio” means, in respect of any date, the ratio between the Daily Inflation Reference
Index determined on that date and 102.41742 (the “Base Inflation Reference Index”). The
Index Ratio will be rounded to five decimal places.

(The Base Inflation Reference Index was calculated as the Daily Inflation Reference Index
determined as of 30 March 2007 with reference to the original, unrevised HICP available on
the same date.)

The Agent Bank will determine the amount of interest payable on each Interest Payment Date
in respect of each Note (in the denomination of €1,000,000) four Business Days (as defined
below) before the relevant Interest Payment Date and shall notify any stock exchange on
which the Notes are at the relevant time listed and promptly publish the relevant Index Ratio
and the amount of interest payable in respect of each Note in accordance with Condition 11 as
soon as possible after their determination. “Business Day” means a day on which commercial
banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments in Athens and a day on which the Trans-
European Automated Real-Time Gross Settlement Express Transfer System (TARGET) is
operating.

Rebasing

If the HICP is rebased to a different year, the Agent Bank will adjust the calculations of the
Daily Inflation Reference Index so that both are expressed in the new base year, even though
a base change may have occurred between the two dates they refer to. The HICP of the old
base year used in calculating the Base Inflation Reference Index will be adjusted to the new
base year by multiplying the Base Inflation Reference Index by the new base for the month on
which the revised HICP is based and dividing the product by the old base HICP figure for the
same month. For every base year change, the two series will be chained on the basis of the
HICP of the last year of joint publication. This procedure will be used for each occasion on
which a revision is made during the term of the Notes.

Substitution

If the HICP for any relevant month is not published by the end of the next month, then a
substitute HICP value (the “Substitute HICP”) will be used for that month and shall be
calculated by the Agent Bank in accordance with the following provisions:

(a)   if a provisional or preliminary HICP has been published by Eurostat in respect of the
      relevant month, such value of HICP will automatically be used as the Substitute HICP
      and such term shall be construed accordingly; and

(b)   if a provisional or preliminary HICP is not available, the Substitute HICP shall be
      calculated in accordance with the following formula:

                                  ⎡ HICP p − 1 ⎤
Substitute HICP = HCIP p − 1 x ⎢                ⎥ to the power of 1/12
                                  ⎣ HICP p − 13 ⎦



                                                                                        Page 9
where P represents that month for which the HICP is not published and it is therefore
necessary to determine a Substitute HICP by extrapolation. For the avoidance of doubt, if the
HICP is not published and it is therefore necessary to determine a Substitute HICP by
extrapolation in accordance with (b) above for two or more consecutive months, the HICP P-1
for any such second or subsequent month shall be the Substitute HICP for the preceding
month.

Agent Bank: Citibank, N.A.

Interest accrual basis: Actual/Actual (ISMA). For the purposes of calculating accrued
interest, the product of (a) 2.085 per cent. and (b) the fraction determined in accordance with
the interest accrual basis shall be rounded to three decimal places.

(4)     Notifications, etc. to be Final

All notifications, opinions, determinations, certificates, calculations, quotations and decisions
given, expressed, made or obtained for the purposes of and in accordance with the provisions
of this Condition, whether by the Agent Bank or otherwise, will (in the absence of wilful
default, bad faith or manifest error) be binding on the Republic, the Paying Agent and all
Noteholders and Couponholders and (in the absence as referred to above) no liability to the
Republic or the Noteholders or the Couponholders shall attach to the Agent in connection
with the exercise or non-exercise by it of its powers, duties and discretions under this
Condition.

(5)     Agent

The Republic will procure that so long as any of the Notes remains outstanding there
shall at all times be an Agent for the purposes of the Notes and the Republic may
terminate the appointment of the Agent. In the event of the appointed office of any bank
being unable or unwilling to continue to act as the Agent, the Republic shall appoint the
Euro-zone office of another major bank engaged in the Euro-zone interbank market to
act in its place. “Euro-zone” means the countries of the European Union which from
time to time have adopted the Euro currency.

4.      REDEMPTION AND PURCHASE

(1)     Final Redemption

Unless previously redeemed or purchased and cancelled as provided below, the Notes will
be redeemed on 25 July 2057 (the “Maturity Date”) in an amount calculated by the
Agent Bank in accordance with the following formula:

Redemption Amount = Index Ratio X Principal Amount

where the Index Ratio is the ratio between the Daily Inflation Reference Index on the
Maturity Date and the Base Inflation Reference Index. If the Redemption Amount so
calculated is less than the principal amount of the Notes, the Notes will be redeemed at
their principal amount.

The Agent Bank will determine the Redemption Amount in respect of each Note (in the
denomination of €1,000,000) four Business Days before the Maturity Date and shall
notify any stock exchange on which the Notes are at the relevant time listed and promptly
publish the relevant Index Ratio and the Redemption Amount in respect of each Note in
accordance with Condition 11 as soon as possible after their determination.




                                                                                          Page 10
(2)     Purchases

The Republic may at any time purchase or otherwise acquire Notes in the open market or
otherwise. Notes purchased or otherwise acquired by the Republic may be held or resold
or, at the discretion of the Republic, surrendered to the Agent for cancellation (together
with (in the case of definitive Notes) any unmatured Coupons attached thereto or
purchased therewith). If purchases are made by tender, tenders must be made available to
all holders of Notes alike.

(3)     Cancellation

All Notes redeemed, and all Notes purchased or otherwise acquired as aforesaid and
surrendered to the Agent for cancellation, shall be cancelled (together, in the case of
definitive Notes, with all unmatured Coupons presented therewith), and thereafter may
not be re-issued or re-sold.

5.      PAYMENTS

Subject as provided below payments will be made in euro cheque drawn on, or by transfer
to, a euro account maintained by the payee. Payments of principal and interest in respect
of the Notes will (subject as provided below) be made against presentation or surrender of
such Notes or Coupons, as the case may be, at any specified office of the Paying Agent
outside the United States. If any Notes are redeemed or become repayable in accordance
with these Conditions prior to the Maturity Date, principal will be payable on surrender
of each Note. All payments of interest and principal with respect to Notes will be made
outside the United States. Upon the due date for redemption of any Note all unmatured
Coupons relating to such Note (whether or not attached) shall become void and no
payment shall be made in respect of them.

If any date for payment of any amount in respect of any Note or Coupon is not a Payment
Day, then the holder thereof shall not be entitled to payment until the next following
Payment Day in the relevant place and shall not be entitled to any further interest or other
sum in respect of any such delay. For these purposes, “Payment Day” means (subject to
Condition 8) a day on which TARGET is operating.

If the due date for redemption of any Note is not an Interest Payment Date, interest
accrued in respect of such Note from (and including) the last preceding Interest Payment
Date (or from the Commencement Date, as the case may be) will be paid only against
surrender of such Note.

The name of the initial Agent and the initial Paying Agent and each of their initial specified
offices are set out below. The Republic reserves the right at any time to vary or terminate
the appointment of the Paying Agent and to appoint additional or other Paying Agents
and/or to approve any change in the specified office of any Paying Agent, provided that it
will, so long as any of the Notes is outstanding, maintain (i) an agent bank (which may be
the Agent) and (ii) a Paying Agent (which may be the Agent) having a specified office in
a leading financial centre in continental Europe which, so long as the Notes are listed on
the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and the rules of such exchange so require, shall be
Luxembourg, termination or change shall only take effect (other than in the case of
insolvency, when it shall be of immediate effect) after not less than 30 days’ prior notice
thereof shall have been given to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 11 and
provided further that neither the resignation nor removal of the Agent shall take effect,
except in the case of insolvency as aforesaid, until a new Agent has been appointed.




                                                                                       Page 11
Furthermore, the Republic undertakes that any Paying Agent maintained shall have a
specified office in a Member State of the European Union that is not obliged to withhold
or deduct tax pursuant to European Directive on the Taxation of Savings Income unless
such obligation is imposed by the same European Directive.

Payments in respect of the Notes will be subject in all cases to any fiscal or other laws
and regulations applicable thereto in the place of payment or to any European Community
legal provision but without prejudice to the provisions of Condition 6.

6.     TAXATION

All payments of principal and/or interest in respect of the Notes and Coupons will be
made without deduction or withholding for or on account of any present or future taxes,
duties, assessments or governmental charges of whatever nature imposed or levied by or
on behalf of the Republic or by or on behalf of any political subdivision thereof or any
authority therein having power to tax (a “Tax”), unless deduction or withholding of such
Tax is compelled by law. In that event the Republic will pay such additional amounts as
will result (after such deduction or withholding) in the receipt by the holders of the Notes
or Coupons of the amounts which would otherwise have been receivable (in the absence
of such deduction or withholding), except that no such additional amount shall be payable
in respect of any Note or Coupon presented for payment:

(a)    by or on behalf of a holder who is subject to such Tax in respect of such Note or
       Coupon by reason of his being connected with the Republic (or any political
       subdivision thereof) otherwise than merely by holding such Note or Coupon or
       receiving principal or interest in respect thereof; or

(b)    by or on behalf of a holder who would not be liable for or subject to such withholding
       or deduction by making a declaration of non-residence or other similar claim for
       exemption to the relevant tax authority if, after having been requested to make such a
       declaration or claim, such holder fails to do so; or

(c)    more than 30 days after the Relevant Date except to the extent that the holder thereof
       would have been entitled to such additional payment on presenting the same for
       payment on the last day of such 30 day period; or

(d)    where such withholding or deduction is imposed on a payment to or for an individual
       and is required to be made pursuant to the European Union Directive on the Taxation
       of Savings Income.

The “Relevant Date” in relation to any Note or Coupon means:

(i)    the due date for payment thereof; or

(ii)   (if the full amount of the monies payable on such date has not been received by the
       Agent on or prior to such due date) the date on which, the full amount of such monies
       having been so received, notice to that effect is duly given to the Noteholders in
       accordance with Condition 11 or individually.

Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to principal in respect of the Notes shall be
deemed to include, as applicable, any additional amounts which may be payable under
this Condition by reason of a deduction or withholding of any amount from payments of
principal.




                                                                                      Page 12
Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to interest in respect of the Notes shall be
deemed to include, as applicable, any additional amounts which may be payable under
this Condition by reason of a deduction or withholding of any amount from payments of
interest.

7.      EVENTS OF DEFAULT

If any of the following events (each an “Event of Default”) occurs:

(a)     the Republic defaults in any payment of interest in respect of any of the Notes or
        Coupons and such default is not cured by payment thereof within 30 days from the
        due date for such payment; or

(b)     the Republic is in default in the performance of any other covenant, condition or
        provision set out in the Notes and continues to be in default for 30 days after written
        notice thereof shall have been given to the Republic by the holder of any Note; or

(c)     in respect of any other External Indebtedness in an amount equal to or exceeding
        U.S.$25,000,000 (or its equivalent), (i) such indebtedness is accelerated so that it
        becomes due and payable prior to the stated maturity thereof as a result of a default
        thereunder and such acceleration has not been rescinded or annulled or (ii) any
        payment obligation under such indebtedness is not paid as and when due and the
        applicable grace period, if any, has lapsed and such non-payment has not been cured;
        or

(d)     a general moratorium is declared by the Republic or the Bank of Greece in respect of
        its External Indebtedness or the Republic or the Bank of Greece announces its
        inability to pay its External Indebtedness as it matures; or

(e)     any government order, decree or enactment shall be made whereby the Republic is
        prevented from observing and performing in full its obligations contained in the
        Notes,

then the holders for the time being of at least 25 per cent. of the aggregate principal
amount of the outstanding Notes may (i) give notice in writing to the Republic and to the
Agent in accordance with Condition 11 that such Notes are immediately due and payable
at their principal amount together with accrued interest (if any) or (ii) decide at a meeting
that such Notes are immediately due and payable, whereupon such Notes shall become
immediately due and payable at their principal amount together with accrued interest (if
any) and/or (iii) decide at a meeting that, if the case may be, litigation be instituted.

The holders of at least 66 2/3 per cent. of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes (at
the time being outstanding) may rescind (i) such notice of acceleration (ii) such decision
to accelerate or (iii) such decision to institute litigation if the event or events of default
giving rise to the declaration or to the decisions have been cured or waived. Such
rescission shall be made by giving notice in writing to the Republic and to the Agent
whereupon such declaration or decision shall be rescinded and have no further effect. No
such rescission shall affect any other or any subsequent Event of Default or any right of
any Noteholder in relation thereto. Such rescission will be conclusive and binding on all
holders of the Notes




                                                                                        Page 13
8.       PRESCRIPTION

Claims for payment of principal in respect of the Notes shall be prescribed upon the
expiry of ten years, and claims for payment of interest in respect of the Notes shall be
prescribed upon the expiry of five years, in each case from the Relevant Date (as defined
in Condition 6) thereof, subject to the provisions of Condition 5.

9.       REPLACEMENT OF NOTES AND COUPONS

If any Note or Coupon is lost, stolen, mutilated, defaced or destroyed, it may be replaced
at the specified office of the Agent upon payment by the claimant of the expenses
incurred in connection therewith and on such terms as to evidence and indemnity as the
Republic may reasonably require. Mutilated or defaced Notes or Coupons must be
surrendered before replacements will be issued.

10.      MEETINGS OF NOTEHOLDERS AND MODIFICATION

The Agency Agreement contains provisions for convening meetings of Noteholders to
consider matters affecting their interests, including modification by Extraordinary
Resolution of these Terms and Conditions or the provisions of the Agency Agreement.
Such a meeting may be convened by the Republic and shall be convened by the Republic
at any time upon the request in writing of the holder or holders of ten per cent. or more in
principal amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding. The quorum for any
meeting convened to consider an Extraordinary Resolution shall be one or more persons
holding or representing not less than 66 2/3 per cent. of the aggregate principal amount of
the Notes for the time being outstanding, or 25 per cent. of the aggregate principal
amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding at any adjourned meeting. However,
at any meeting, the business of which is to:

(i)      change the due date for the payment of the principal, premium (if any) or any
         installment of interest on the Notes;

(ii)     reduce or cancel the principal amount or redemption price or premium (if any) of the
         Notes;

(iii)    reduce the portion of the principal amount which is payable upon acceleration of the
         maturity of the Notes;

(iv)     reduce the interest rate on the Notes or any premium payable upon redemption of the
         Notes;

(v)      change the currency in which interest, premium (if any) or principal will be paid or
         the places at which interest, premium (if any) or principal of Notes is payable;

(vi)     shorten the period during which the Republic is not permitted to redeem Notes, or
         permit the Republic to redeem Notes if, prior to such action, the Republic is not
         permitted to do so;

(vii)    reduce the proportion of the principal amount of the Notes whose vote or consent is
         necessary to modify, amend or supplement the Agency Agreement or the Terms and
         Conditions of the Notes;

(viii)   reduce the proportion of the principal amount of the Notes whose vote or consent is
         necessary to make, take or give any request, demand, authorisation, direction, notice,




                                                                                        Page 14
         consent, waiver or other action provided to be made in the Agency Agreement or the
         Terms and Conditions of the Notes;

(ix)     change the obligation of the Republic to pay additional amounts with respect to the
         Notes;

(x)      change this definition, the definition of “outstanding” contained in the Agency
         Agreement or the definition of “Written Resolution” set out below;

(xi)     change the governing law provision of the Notes;

(xii)    change the courts to the jurisdiction of which the Republic has submitted, its
         obligation under the Agency Agreement or the Terms and Conditions of the Notes to
         appoint and maintain an agent for service of process or the waiver of immunity in
         respect of actions or proceedings brought by any holder based upon a Note; or

(xiii)   appoint a committee to represent Noteholders after an event of default occurs;

(each a “Reserved Matter”),

the necessary quorum will be one or more persons holding or representing not less than
75 per cent. of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding
or not less than 50 per cent. of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes for the time
being outstanding at any adjourned meeting.

Resolutions may be duly passed as an Extraordinary Resolution at any meeting of the
Noteholders or by Written Resolution and will be binding on all the Noteholders (whether
or not they are present at such meeting and whether or not they sign the Written
Resolution) and on all Couponholders.

An “Extraordinary Resolution” means a resolution passed at a meeting of the Noteholders
duly convened and held in accordance with the provisions above by or on behalf of the
holders of: (i) in the case of a Reserved Matter, at least 75 per cent. of the aggregate principal
amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding or at least 50 per cent. at any adjourned
meeting of aggregate principal amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding, or (ii) in
the case of a matter other than a Reserved Matter, at least 66 2/3 per cent. of the aggregate
principal amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding or at least 25 per cent. at any
adjourned meeting of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes for the time being
outstanding.

A “Written Resolution” means a resolution in writing signed by or on behalf of the holders
of: (i) in the case of a Reserved Matter, at least 75 per cent. of the aggregate principal amount
of the Notes for the time being outstanding, or (ii) in the case of a matter other than a
Reserved Matter, at least 66 2/3 per cent. of the aggregate principal amount of the Notes for
the time being outstanding. Any Written Resolution may be contained in one document or
several documents in the same form, each signed by or on behalf of one or more Noteholders.

The Republic and the Agent may, without the vote or consent of any holder of the Notes,
amend the Agency Agreement or the Notes for the purpose of:

(i)      adding to Republic’s covenants for the benefit of the holders of the Notes;

(ii)     surrendering any right or power conferred upon the Republic;




                                                                                           Page 15
(iii)   securing the Notes;

(iv)    curing any ambiguity or curing, correcting or supplementing any defective
        provision in the Notes or the Agency Agreement;

(v)     amending the Agency Agreement or any of the Notes in any manner which the
        Republic and the Agent may determine and which is not inconsistent with the
        Notes and does not in the opinion of the Republic adversely affect the interest of
        any holder of the Notes;

(vi)    correcting in the opinion of the Republic a manifest error of a formal, minor or
        technical nature; or

(vii)   complying with mandatory provisions of law or any other modification provided
        that such modification is not in the opinion of the Republic materially prejudicial
        to the interests of the Holders.

 Any such modification, waiver or authorisation shall be binding on the Noteholders and
 any such modification unless the Agent otherwise requires, shall be notified by the Agent
 to the Noteholders as soon as practicable thereafter.

For the purposes of (i) ascertaining the right to attend and vote at any meeting of Noteholders,
(ii) Condition 10 (Meetings of Noteholders and Modification) of the Offering Circular and
Schedule 3 of the Agency Agreement (Provisions for Meetings of Noteholders) and
(iii) Condition 7 (Events of Default) and for purposes of determining whether the required
percentage of holders of the Notes are present at a meeting for quorum purposes, or has
consented to or voted in favour of any request, demand, authorisation, direction, notice,
consent, waiver, amendment, modification or supplement to the Notes or the Agency
Agreement, or whether the required percentage of holders has delivered a notice of
acceleration of the Notes, any Notes that the Republic owns or controls directly or indirectly
will be disregarded and deemed not to be outstanding. For this purpose, Notes owned,
directly or indirectly, by the Bank of Greece or any of the Republic’s local authorities and
other local authorities’ entities will not be regarded as, or deemed to be, owned or controlled,
directly or indirectly by the Republic.

“Control” means the power, directly or indirectly, through the ownership of voting securities
or other ownership interests or otherwise, to direct the management of or elect or appoint a
majority of the board of directors or other persons performing similar functions in lieu of, or
in addition to, the board of directors of a corporation, trust, financial institution or other
entity.

Before any request is made or notice is delivered or Written Resolution is signed by any
Noteholder in accordance with the provisions of this Condition 10 or Condition 7, the
relevant Noteholder must deposit its Notes with the Paying Agent and obtain two copies of an
acknowledgment of receipt (an “Acknowledgment”) signed and dated by the Paying Agent
and certifying the nominal amount of Notes so deposited. Any request so made, notice so
given or Written Resolution so signed by any Noteholder must be accompanied by an
Acknowledgment issued to the Noteholder. Notes so deposited will not be released until the
earlier of (i) the thirtieth day after the date of deposit and (ii) the request, notice or Written
Resolution becoming effective in accordance with these Terms and Conditions and will only
be released against surrender of a relevant Acknowledgment.




                                                                                           Page 16
11.     NOTICES

(A)     All notices to the Noteholders will be valid if published, so long as the Notes are
listed on the regulated market (as contemplated by the Prospectus Directive) of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange and the rules of that exchange so require, in the d’Wort or any
other daily newspaper of general circulation in Luxembourg or published on the website of
the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu). Such notice shall be deemed to have been
given on the date of such publication or, if published more than once, on the date of the first
such publication. If publication is not practicable as is mentioned above, notices will be valid
if given in such other manner, and shall be deemed to have been given on such dates, as
the Agent shall determine. Couponholders shall be deemed for all purposes to have notice
of the contents of any notice given to the Noteholders in accordance with this Condition
11.

(B)     Notices to the Republic to be given by any holder of the Notes shall be in writing and
given by lodging the same, together with the relative Note or Notes, with the Agent. A copy
of any notice under Condition 7 must, to be valid, also be delivered to Ministry of Economy
and Finance, General Accounting Office, Public Debt Directorate at the following address:

Ministry of Economy and Finance
General Accounting Office
Public Debt Directorate
37 Panepistimiou St.
101 65 Athens – Greece
Tel. 00 30 210 3338 360
Fax. 00 30 210 3234 967

12.     AGENT AND PAYING AGENTS

In acting under the Agency Agreement, the Agent and the Paying Agent will act solely as
agents of the Republic and do not assume any obligations or relationships of agency or trust
to or with the Noteholders or Couponholders. The Agency Agreement contains provisions for
the indemnification of the Paying Agents and for relief from responsibility in certain
circumstances, and entitles any of them to enter into business transactions with the Republic
without being liable to account to the Noteholders or the Couponholders for any resulting
profit.

13.     FURTHER ISSUES

The Republic shall be at liberty from time to time without the consent of the Noteholders
or Couponholders to create and issue further Notes having terms and conditions the same
as the Notes or the same in all respects save for the amount and date of the first payment
of interest thereon and so that the same shall be consolidated and form a single series with
and increase the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Notes.

14.     GOVERNING LAW AND SUBMISSION TO JURISDICTION

(A)     The Agency Agreement, the Notes and the Coupons are governed by, and shall be
construed in accordance with, English law.

(B)      The Republic irrevocably agrees, for the exclusive benefit of the Paying Agents, the
Noteholders and the Couponholders, that the courts of England are to have jurisdiction to
settle any disputes which may arise out of or in connection with the Agency Agreement, the
Notes and/or the Coupons and that accordingly any suit, action or proceedings arising out of




                                                                                         Page 17
or in connection with the Agency Agreement, the Notes and the Coupons (together referred to
as “Proceedings”) may be brought in such courts.

The Republic hereby irrevocably waives any objection which it may have now or hereafter to
the laying of the venue of any such Proceedings in any such court and any claim that any such
Proceedings have been brought in an inconvenient forum and hereby further irrevocably
agrees that a judgment in any such Proceedings brought in the English courts shall be
conclusive and binding upon it and may be enforced in the courts of any other jurisdiction.

Nothing contained in this Condition shall limit any right to take Proceedings against the
Republic in any other court of competent jurisdiction, and the taking of Proceedings in one or
more jurisdictions shall not preclude the taking of Proceedings in any other jurisdiction,
whether concurrently or not. The Republic appoints the Economic and Commercial
Counsellor for the time being of the Greek Embassy, 1a Holland Park, London Wl1 3TP, Fax
+ 44 20 7727 9934 as its agent for service of process in England, and undertakes that, in the
event of such agent ceasing so to act or no longer having an address in England, it will
appoint another person as its agent for service of process in England in respect of any
Proceedings. Nothing herein shall affect the right to serve Proceedings in any other manner
permitted by law.

The Republic hereby irrevocably and unconditionally waives with respect to the Agency
Agreement, the Notes and/or the Coupons any right to claim immunity from jurisdiction or
execution and any similar defence and irrevocably and unconditionally consents to the giving
of any relief or the issue of any process, including, without limitation, the making,
enforcement or execution against any property whatsoever (irrespective of its use or intended
use) of any order or judgment validly made or given in connection with any Proceedings.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the property of the Republic is subject to execution and
attachment to the extent permitted by the international conventions and Greek law.

15.     CONTRACTS (RIGHTS OF THIRD PARTIES) ACT 1999

No rights are conferred on any person under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act
1999 to enforce any term of this Note, but this does not affect any right or remedy of any
person which exists or is available apart from that Act.

A judicial fee (being at the date hereof at the rate of approximately one per cent. of the
amount claimed) will be payable to the Republic upon the commencement of Proceedings in
the courts of the Republic to obtain a judgment, or to enforce a judgment obtained in any
jurisdiction outside the Republic, for the payment of any sum due from the Republic. This
judicial fee may be recoverable from the defeated party by the person commencing such
Proceedings if such person is successful in such Proceedings.




                                                                                       Page 18
  SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE NOTES WHILE IN GLOBAL
                            FORM

The Temporary Global Note and Permanent Global Note contain provisions which apply
to the Notes while they are in global form, some of which modify the effect of the terms
and conditions of the Notes set out in this document. The following is a summary of
certain of those provisions:

1.      EXCHANGE FOR DEFINITIVE NOTES

(i)     The Temporary Global Note will be exchangeable, in whole or in part, for the
        Permanent Global Note not earlier than 40 days after the Closing Date upon
        certification as to non-U.S. beneficial ownership.

(ii)    The Permanent Global Note is exchangeable in whole, but not in part, for definitive
        bearer Notes only if (a) Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg are closed for
        business for a continuous period of 14 days (other than by reason of legal holidays) or
        have announced an intention permanently to cease business and no alternative
        clearance system satisfactory to the Agent is available; or (b) the Republic or any
        person acting on its behalf is obliged to pay additional amounts as provided for or
        referred to in Condition 6 which would not be required were the Notes in definitive
        bearer form; or (c) an Event of Default (as defined in Condition 7) has occurred and
        is continuing.

If principal in respect of any Notes is not paid when due and payable the holder of the
Permanent Global Note may by notice to the Agent (which may but need not be the
default notice referred to in “Default” below) require the exchange of a specified principal
amount of the Permanent Global Note (which may be equal to or (provided that, if the
Permanent Global Note is held by or on behalf of a clearing system, that clearing system
agrees) less than the outstanding principal amount of Notes represented thereby) for
definitive Notes on or after the exchange date specified in such notice.

On or after any exchange into definitive Notes the holder of the Permanent Global Note
may surrender the Permanent Global Note or, in the case of a partial exchange, present it
for endorsement to or to the order of the Agent. In exchange for the Permanent Global Note,
or the part thereof to be exchanged, the Republic will deliver, or procure the delivery of, an
equal aggregate principal amount of duly executed and authenticated definitive Notes in
bearer form (having attached to them all Coupons in respect of interest which has not already
been paid on the Permanent Global Note), security printed in accordance with any applicable
legal and stock exchange requirements and in or substantially in the form set out in Parts III,
IV and V of Schedule 2 to the Agency Agreement. On exchange in full of the Permanent
Global Note, the Republic will, if the holder so requests, procure that it is cancelled and
returned to the holder together with any relevant definitive Notes.

2.      PAYMENTS

No payment will be made on the Temporary Global Note unless exchange for an interest
in the Permanent Global Note is improperly withheld or refused provided that, in the case
of an improper withholding of, or refusal to exchange, an interest in the Permanent
Global Note, a certificate of non-U.S. beneficial ownership has been properly provided.

Payments of principal and interest in respect of Notes represented by the Permanent
Global Note will be made against presentation for endorsement and, if no further payment
falls to be made in respect of the Notes, surrender of the Permanent Global Note to or to




                                                                                        Page 19
the order of the Agent or Paying Agent as shall have been notified to the Noteholders for
such purpose. A record of each payment so made will be endorsed on the appropriate
schedule to the Permanent Global Note, which endorsement will be prima facie evidence
that such payment has been made in respect of the Notes.

3.     NOTICES

Notices shall be given as provided in Condition 11, save that so long as the Notes are
represented by the Temporary Global Note or Permanent Global Note and the Temporary
Global Note or Permanent Global Note is held on behalf of a clearing system, in addition
to publication as required by Condition 11, notice may be given by delivery of the
relevant notice to that clearing system for communication by it to entitled accountholders.

4.     PURCHASE AND CANCELLATION

Cancellation of any Note to be cancelled following its purchase by the Republic will be
effected by reduction in the principal amount of the Permanent Global Note.

5.     DEFAULT

The global Notes provide that the holder may cause the global Note or a portion of it to
become due and payable in the circumstances described in Condition 7 by stating in the
notice to the Republic the principal amount of Notes which is being declared due and
payable.




                                                                                     Page 20
                                 USE OF PROCEEDS

The gross proceeds from the issue of Notes, which are €594,479,478, will, after payment
of the combined management and underwriting commission and selling concession
referred to under “Subscription and Sale” below, be used by the Republic for its general
funding purposes.




                                                                                  Page 21
                                  GREEK TAXATION

The comments below are of a general nature and are based on the provisions of tax
laws currently in force in Greece. Noteholders who are in doubt as to their personal
tax position should consult their professional advisers.

All payments due from the Republic in respect of principal or interest in respect of the
Notes may be made free and clear of, and without deduction or withholding for or on
account of any Greek taxes provided that the holder of the relevant Note or, as the case
may be, Coupon is not subject to such tax by reason of his being connected with the
Republic or otherwise than merely by holding such Note or Coupon.

No additional amount shall be payable on account of Greek taxes by any individual
holder of Notes who is a foreign tax resident and who has provided evidence that he or
she has received or secured such interest payment for his or her own benefit (in the sense
of article 4, paras 1(a) to 1(c) (inclusive) of Law 3312/2005, which implements the
European Union Directive on the Taxation of Savings Income into Greek law.

Holders of the Notes, regardless of whether they are residents or not for tax purposes in
the Republic, will not be subject to Greek taxes or duties on capital gains realised from
the sale or redemption of their Notes or Coupons.

No stamp, registration or similar taxes are currently payable in the Republic in respect of
execution or delivery of any of the documents in connection with the execution, issue or
transfer of any of the Notes or Coupons.




                                                                                     Page 22
                                SUBSCRIPTION AND SALE

Goldman Sachs International, EFG Eurobank Ergasions S.A. and National Bank of Greece
S.A. (the “Managers”) have, pursuant to a Subscription Agreement dated 28 March 2008
(the “Subscription Agreement”), agreed with the Republic to subscribe and pay for the
Notes at the issue price of 94.60 per cent. of the principal amount of the Notes plus an
amount equal to 115 days’ accrued interest from, and including, 1 April 2008, to, but
excluding, 25 July 2008, less a combined management and underwriting commission and
selling concession of 0.275 per cent. of the principal amount of the Notes.

The Managers are entitled to terminate the Subscription Agreement in certain
circumstances prior to payment to the Republic.

The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the U.S. Securities Act of 1933
(the “Securities Act”) and are subject to U.S. tax law requirements. Subject to certain
exceptions, Notes may not be offered, sold or delivered within the United States or to
U.S. persons. The Managers have agreed that it will not offer, sell or deliver any Notes
within the United States or to U.S. persons, except as permitted by the Subscription
Agreement.

In addition, until 40 days after the commencement of the offering, an offer or sale of
Notes within the United States by any dealer (whether or not participating in the offering)
may violate the registration requirements of the Securities Act.

The Managers have represented and agreed that they have complied and will comply with
all applicable provisions of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 with respect to
anything done by it in relation to the Notes in, from or otherwise involving the United
Kingdom.

The Notes have not been and will not be registered under U.S. Securities Act of 1933 (the
“Securities Act”) and may not be offered or sold within the United States except pursuant to
an exemption from, or in a transaction not subject to, the registration requirements of the
Securities Act.

Each Manager:

(a)    has represented, warranted and undertaken to the Republic that it has offered and sold
       the Notes, and will offer and sell the Notes:

            (i) as part of their distribution, at any time; and

           (ii) otherwise, until 40 days after the Closing Date,

       only in accordance with Rule 903 of Regulation S under the Securities Act and,
       accordingly, that:

          (A) neither it nor any of its affiliates (including any person acting on behalf of
              such Manager or any of its affiliates) have engaged or will engage in any
              directed selling efforts with respect to the Notes; and

           (B) the Manager and its respective affiliates have complied and will comply with
               the offering restrictions requirement of Regulation S under the Securities Act;
               and




                                                                                       Page 23
(b)     undertaken to the Republic that, at or prior to confirmation of sale, they will have sent
        to each distributor, dealer or person receiving a selling concession, fee or other
        remuneration which purchases Notes from it during the restricted period a
        confirmation or notice in substantially the following form:

        "The Securities covered hereby have not been registered under the United States
        Securities Act of 1933 (the Securities Act) and may not be offered or sold within the
        United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons, (i) as part of their
        distribution at any time or (ii) otherwise until 40 days after the later of the
        commencement of the offering and the closing date, except in either case in
        accordance with Regulation S under the Securities Act. Terms used above have the
        meanings given to them by Regulation S."

Each Manager has represented and undertaken to the Republic that:

(a)     except to the extent permitted under United States Treasury Regulation
        §1.163-5(c)(2)(i)(D) (the “D Rules”):

            (i) they have not offered or sold, and during the restricted period will not offer
                or sell, any Notes to a person who is within the United States or its
                possessions or to a United States person; and

           (ii) they have not delivered and will not deliver in definitive form within the
                United States or its possessions any Notes sold during the restricted period;

(b)     they have, and throughout the restricted period will have, in effect procedures
        reasonably designed to ensure that its employees or agents who are directly engaged
        in selling Notes are aware that the Notes may not be offered or sold during the
        restricted period to a person who is within the United States or its possessions or to a
        United States person, except as permitted by the D Rules; and

(c)     if it is a United States person, it is acquiring the Notes for the purposes of resale in
        connection with their original issuance and, if it retains Notes for its own account, it
        will only do so in accordance with the requirements of United States Treasury
        Regulation §1.163-5(c)(2)(i)(D)(6),

and, with respect to each affiliate of any Manager that acquires Notes from such Manager for
the purpose of offering or selling such Notes during the restricted period, such Manager
undertakes to the Republic that it will obtain from such affiliate for the benefit of the
Republic the representations and undertakings contained in sub-paragraphs (a), (b) and (c)
above.

No action has been taken in any jurisdiction that would permit a public offering of any of the
Notes or, or possession or distribution of the Offering Circular, or any other offering material
relating to the Notes or any supplement, in any country or jurisdiction where action for that
purpose is required. Further neither the Republic nor the Managers represent that Notes may
at any time lawfully be sold in compliance with any applicable registration or other
requirements in any jurisdiction or pursuant to any exemption available thereunder or
assumes any responsibility for facilitating the same.

Each Manager agrees that it will comply with all relevant laws, regulations and directives in
each jurisdiction in which it purchases, offers, sells or delivers Notes or have in their
possession or distributes any other offering material relating to the Notes or any supplement.




                                                                                          Page 24
                           GENERAL INFORMATION

1.   The issue of the Notes has been duly authorised pursuant to (a) article 1 of
     L. 2187/94, as in force, article 31 of Law 1914/1990, Laws 2628/98 (for the
     establishment of the Public Debt Management Agency (PDMA)), 2682/99 and
     3091/2002 and (b) Ministerial Decisions 2/44514/004 dated 16 June 1999 and
     published on 7 July 1999 of the Minister of Finance and 238/0094/3 January 2005 of
     the Minister of Economy and Finance.

2.   Application has been made to list the Notes on the regulated market (as contemplated
     by the Prospectus Directive) of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. As long as the
     Notes are listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange, the Republic will maintain a
     Paying Agent having a specified office in Luxembourg.

3.   The Notes have been accepted for clearance through Euroclear and Clearstream,
     Luxembourg with a Common Code of 029246777. The ISIN code for the Temporary
     Global Note is XS0347909490. The ISIN code for the Permanent Global Note is
     XS0292467775.

4.   Copies of the Agency Agreement, incorporating the respective forms of the global
     Notes and the definitive Notes, and the Deed of Covenant, may be inspected on any
     Business Day (Saturdays and public holidays excepted) at the specified offices of the
     Paying Agent.

5.   The Notes and Coupons will contain the following legend “Any United States person
     who holds this obligation will be subject to limitations under the United States
     income tax laws, including the limitations provided in Sections 165(j) and 1287(a) of
     the Internal Revenue Code”.




                                                                                    Page 25
                                  THE ISSUER

                           The Hellenic Republic
                      Ministry of Economy and Finance
                      Public Debt Management Agency
                               8 Omirou Street
                                10564 Athens


                                  MANAGERS

                       Goldman Sachs International
                           Peterborough Court
                             133 Fleet Street
                           London EC4A 2BB

 EFG Eurobank Ergasias S.A.                National Bank of Greece S.A.
      8 Othoros Street                            86 Eolou Street
       10557 Athens                                10232 Athens


                               AGENT,
                      PRINCIPAL PAYING AGENT
                          AND AGENT BANK
                            Citibank, N.A.
                           Citigroup Centre
                            Canada Square
                            Canary Wharf
                           London E14 5LB


                   LUXEMBOURG PAYING AGENT
                         AND LISTING AGENT
        Dexia Banque Internationale à Luxembourg , société anonyme
                              69, route d’Esch
                           L-2953 Luxembourg


                            LEGAL ADVISERS

To the Republic as to Greek law            To the Managers as to English law
     Vassilios Contolaimos                  Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer
Ministry of Economy and Finance                      65 Fleet Street
Public Debt Management Agency                     London EC4Y 1HS
         8 Omirou Street
          10564 Athens


                      To the Managers as to Greek law
                        Law Office T.J. Koutalidis
                             4, Valaoritou Str.,
                              Athens, 106 71




                                                                           Page 26
