                        The Stipula Platform
a workbench for programming and analyzing legal contracts

                       Cosimo Laneve[0000−0002−0052−4061]

                          DISI, University of Bologna, Italy
                             cosimo.laneve@unibo.it



      Abstract. Stipula is a domain-specific programming language specifi-
      cally designed to model and enforce legal contracts. This paper presents
      the foundational design principles of Stipula, focusing on its ability to
      express and regulate permissions, obligations, prohibitions, and escrows.
      We introduce a comprehensive suite of tools developed to support con-
      tract development in Stipula, including a visual code editor for intuitive
      contract authoring, an interpreter for automatic execution, and a number
      of analyzers for verifying several legally relevant properties (unreachabil-
      ity of clauses, absence of frozen assets, etc.). These tools are integrated
      into a unified workbench, designed to empower legal practitioners and
      developers to write, test, debug, and manage smart legal contracts effec-
      tively and efficiently.


1   Introduction
Traditional legal texts are typically expressed in natural language, which is in-
herently ambiguous and susceptible to multiple interpretations. This linguistic
flexibility, while essential for human communication, poses significant challenges
for automated processing, analysis, and verification. The digitalization of legal
texts offers substantial benefits: it can increase efficiency through faster infor-
mation retrieval and even enable the automatic execution of well-specified pro-
cedures. Moreover, digital representations facilitate improved data organization
and promote greater transparency in legal processes. However, the computational
treatment of legal texts remains a difficult task. Their complexity, coupled with
the expressiveness and ambiguity of natural language, often necessitates human
judgment to achieve reliable interpretation.
    To address these challenges, several research initiatives have proposed domain-
specific programming languages for the specification of legal contracts e.g., [35,
29, 30, 38]. These languages introduce a precise syntax that mitigates some of the
ambiguities of natural language, and often provide graphical interfaces to help
map normative elements directly to executable code. However, while such efforts
advance the expressiveness and accessibility of digital contracts, they typically
devote limited attention to the formal verification of correctness. This limita-
tion is particularly critical in the legal domain, where ambiguities or unintended
execution behaviours may result in severe legal and financial consequences. Al-
though progress has been made in developing methodologies and tools for the
2       C. Laneve

formal verification of legal contracts, their adoption in practice remains rare.
One major obstacle is the inherent complexity of formal reasoning tools, which
discourages their use by legal practitioners and restricts their integration into
standard workflows.
    To overcome the current lack of automatic verification techniques, in 2021
we introduced Stipula [11, 12, 27], a domain-specific language explicitly designed
for the specification of legal contracts. Stipula is built around a small set of con-
cise and intelligible primitives that directly capture the distinctive elements of
contracts. The language is grounded in a formal operational semantics, ensur-
ing that its behaviour is rigorously defined and thus amenable to automated
verification.
    The supporting toolchain [13] has been developed to facilitate the entire con-
tract lifecycle. It includes a visual code editor that enables intuitive authoring of
contracts, an interpreter for automatic execution, a type inference system that
minimizes the need for explicit annotations, and an unreachability analyzer that
identifies clauses which can never be executed. Ongoing work extends this suite
with a liquidity analyzer, which guarantees that no assets remain indefinitely
frozen within a contract. While the theoretical framework of liquidity analysis
has already been formalized, its implementation is currently under development.
All of these tools are integrated into a unified workbench, designed to support
both legal practitioners and developers in writing, testing, debugging, and man-
aging smart legal contracts. The workbench provides a seamless environment
that promotes efficiency, correctness, and accessibility, thereby bridging the gap
between formal verification techniques and their practical use in the legal do-
main.
    The development of the platform began in 2021 with the interpreter and
type inference system described in [12]. It was later expanded through two un-
dergraduate theses at the University of Bologna [36, 21], which introduced the
visual editor and the unreachability analyzer studied in [26]. The environment
that integrates and harmonizes these tools was also developed as part of an un-
dergraduate thesis [17]. This paper consolidates these earlier contributions and
provides a unified account of the resulting toolchain. Our aim is to present the
platform in a way that is both technically rigorous and accessible to practition-
ers and legal experts, enabling them to experiment with and adopt the system
without requiring extensive prior training in formal methods or programming.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces
the Stipula language and illustrates its main constructs through an example
that demonstrates how obligations, permissions, and events can be naturally
expressed. Section 3 presents the execution environment, while Section 4 de-
scribes the visual editor that supports contract authoring. The integration of
type inference within the interpreter is discussed in Section 5. Section 6 outlines
the analysis technique used to identify unreachable clauses, whereas Section 7 is
devoted to liquidity analysis, which determines whether contractual assets may
remain indefinitely frozen. Section 8 situates our contribution in the context of
                                                           The Stipula Platform        3

     related research on contract languages and formal verification. Finally, Section 9
     concludes the paper and discusses avenues for future work.


     2   Legal contracts in Stipula
     We introduce Stipula through a case study modeling a legal contract for bike
     rentals, structured into three articles:
      1. This Agreement shall commence when the Borrower takes possession of the
         Bike and remain in full force and effect until the Bike is returned to Lender.
         The Borrower shall return the Bike within k hours after the rental and will
         pay Euro cost in advance where half of the amount is of surcharge for late
         return.
      2. Payment. Borrower shall pay the amount specified in Article 1 when this
         agreement commences.
      3. End. If the Bike is returned within the agreed time specified in Article 1,
         then half of the cost will be returned to Borrower; the other half is given to
         the Lender. Otherwise the full cost is given to the Lender.
     These articles are transposed into Stipula as follows:
1    stipula Bike_Rental {
2      fields cost , k
3      assets wallet , bike
4      agreement ( Borrower , Lender ){
5           Borrower , Lender : cost , k
6      } => @Inactive
7      @Inactive Lender : offer [ b ] {
8           b ( bike // the bike access code is stored in the contract
9      } => @Payment
10     @Payment Borrower : pay [ x ]
11       ( x == cost ) {
12          x ( wallet // the contract keeps the money
13          bike ( Borrower // the Borrower keeps the bike access code
14          now + k  @Using {
15               wallet ( Lender // deadline expired : the whole wallet to Lender
16          } => @End
17     } => @Using
18     @Using Borrower : end { // bike returned before the deadline
19       0.5 × wallet ( wallet , Lender // half wallet to Lender
20       wallet ( Borrower // half wallet to Borrower
21     } => @End
22   }
                       Listing 1. The Bike_Rental contract in Stipula

         The contract named Bike_Rental is defined using the stipula keyword
     and distinguishes between two core types of entities: fields at line 2, which
     store scalar values (e.g., integers, booleans), and assets at line 3, which rep-
     resent tangible or transferable items such as currencies, fungible tokens, and
     non-fungible tokens. The language provides ad-hoc operations for manipulating
     assets, thereby justifying a clear semantic distinction with fields.
         Lines 4–6 define the agreement clause, a distinctive feature of a legal contract
     that models the moment when, after the possible negotiation of the contractual
     content, the parties, which are listed at line 4, express consent on the values of
4       C. Laneve

fields (in this case cost and k) – the meeting of the minds. The contract then
starts in the state Inactive – line 6 –, thus producing its legal effects.
    Stipula adopts a state-machine programming style to model permissions, pro-
hibitions and obligations that usually change over time according to the actions
that have been done (or not). For example, in the Inactive state, the contract
is giving permission to the Lender to send an access code that will be used by
the Borrower for unblocking the bike. Once the code has been sent, the contract
goes into a state Payment where the Lender can no more withdraw from the
rental and the unique permitted operation is the payment of the rental by the
Borrower. In Stipula, permissions are specified in the function signatures that
define the state, the party that can invoke the function and the arguments.
    In the case of offer, the argument is an asset that represents the code to
unblock the bike; for this reason it is in square brackets (on the contrary, standard
values are in round brackets). The move operation b ( bike at line 8 carries
the token in b to bike, thus emptying the content of b. In this case the token is
non-fungible, i.e. indivisible, which means that bike is an empty asset that will
retain the code b after the move.
    The function pay at lines 10-17 specifies the payment of the rental by the
Borrower. In particular, the Borrower has to sent an asset x that corresponds
to the agreed cost of the rental. The currency is stored in the wallet – line 12
– and, at the same time, the bike code is sent to the Borrower – the operation
bike ( Borrower at line 13 –, thus letting Borrower use the bike. The body of
pay also contains another distinguishing feature of Stipula: the event clause. In
this case, the event is scheduled at time now + k – lines 14-16 – and it asserts
that, if the bike is not returned within the agreed time of k hours (starting
from now, the time when the function pay is invoked), the Borrower has to
pay the whole amount in the wallet as specified in Article 3. This mechanism
is employed in Stipula to enforce the Borrower’s obligation to return the bike
within the specified timeframe. Notably, the wallet asset functions as an escrow,
temporarily holding funds as a guarantee of compliance with the contractual
terms.
    The function at lines 18-21 defines the timely return of the bike by the Bor-
rower (Article 3); the operation 0.5 × wallet ( wallet, Lender halves the
content of the wallet and sends that amount to the Lender; therefore the fol-
lowing operation wallet ( Borrower sends to the Borrower the remaining half.
The use of arithmetic operations on the wallet asset indicates that it is fungi-
ble, meaning its units are interchangeable and divisible, as is typical for digital
currencies or tokens representing monetary value.
    Notably, the foregoing code also reflects an implicit trust placed by both the
Lender and the Borrower in the contract itself, which acts as an autonomous
intermediary capable of securely storing sensible information and assets. In par-
ticular, assets can be temporarily retained by legal contracts and subsequently
redistributed when specific conditions are met. To support this, the language
treats assets as first-class values, equipped with dedicated operations for explicit
and controlled management (the move ( and the square brackets in functions’
                                                            The Stipula Platform       5

     signatures). This contrasts with the traditional rental setting, in which the Bor-
     rower typically pays the Lender upfront via credit card, and the transaction is
     mediated – and guaranteed – by a financial institution acting as a trusted third
     party, often at a cost. In contrast, Stipula enables contracts to directly man-
     age asset transfers, thereby eliminating the need for external intermediaries and
     enabling more autonomous, cost-efficient agreements. We refer to [12] for the
     complete definition of the syntax and the semantics of Stipula.
         It is important to highlight a significant consequence of the digitalization
     of legal contracts. As illustrated by the code in Listing 2, it is possible for the
     Borrower to accept the contractual terms without actually completing the pay-
     ment for the rental. In this scenario, the Lender’s bike becomes inaccessible: the
     access code – stored in the bike asset – has been disclosed, but no party can
     make legitimate use of it thereafter.
         This outcome is not a failure of the digitalization process itself, but rather
     a flaw in the original contract design, specifically within the Articles defined at
     the beginning of the section. In other words, the contract omits a crucial clause
     that should state:

     2.a If the Borrower does not pay within k/6 hours, the contract is deemed invalid
         and the bike is returned to the Lender.

        Translating this provision into Stipula entails refining the implementation of
     the offer function as follows:
7        @Inactive Lender : offer [ b ] {
8            b ( bike // the bike access code is stored in the contract
9            now + k /6  @Payment { bike ( Lender } => @End
10       } => @Payment
            Listing 2. Refinement of the function offer in the Bike_Rental contract



     3     Executing Stipula contracts
     As a principled high-level language, Stipula is designed to be implementation-
     agnostic and does not assume any specific computing architecture. Nevertheless,
     given that legal contracts are critical instruments with binding obligations, their
     digital execution requires strong guarantees from the underlying computing plat-
     form. These guarantees are essential to ensure the correctness, security, and legal
     enforceability of the contract’s behavior. We identify three critical guarantees:

     trust: The platform must guarantee that all parties observe a consistent and
        tamper-proof execution of the contract. This includes providing a reliable
        notion of time and supporting verifiable asset transfers between parties and
        contracts, thus ensuring predictable and enforceable contract behaviour.
     authentication: Every function invocation must be authenticated using secure
        identities (e.g., digital signatures or cryptographic credentials), thus ensuring
        that only authorized parties can interact with the contract and invoke clauses
        specific to their roles.
6       C. Laneve

auditability: To support accountability and legal enforceability, the platform
   must produce auditable logs, such as event traces and transaction histories.
   These records enable post-execution analysis, facilitate dispute resolution,
   and support compliance verification.

    The prototype [13] is implemented in Java and can be executed on a standard
computing platform. The notion of trust is grounded in the assumption that the
program operates within a secure and trusted environment – such as a bank,
court, or notary office – where the integrity of the execution is guaranteed.
Authentication is achieved through security credentials issued and managed by
the hosting institution, ensuring that only authorized parties can access and
interact with the contract. Auditability is supported by systematically recording
execution logs, which are archived daily to enable traceability and post-execution
verification. (In [12] we also discuss the implementation of the main elements of
Stipula on top of a distributed system such as a blockchain.)
    Let us show the execution flow of Bike_Rental. The process begins with the
syntactic analysis of the input code, followed by type inference (see Section 5).
After these preliminary steps, the interpreter evaluates the contract’s agreement
clause, which involves generating and displaying a unique code for each party
involved. These codes serve as identifiers and access credentials, enabling secure
interaction with the contract. In practical deployments, they would correspond
to IDs and passwords assigned to the contracting parties. In the case of the
Bike_Rental contract, two possible access codes might be:
    ––––––––––
    Lender: ef6h4
    Borrower: MHWBs
    ––––––––––
Next, the interpreter prompts the parties to input their assigned access codes,
along with the initial values of the fields that require mutual agreement. Once
these inputs are provided and their correspondence has been checked, the inter-
preter identifies and displays the set of functions that are eligible to be invoked
at the current stage. For example:
    # Please, choose which function should run:
    Lender.offer()[Asset b]
In this scenario, only the Lender is authorized to invoke the offer function. The
invocation includes a parameter representing the code used to unlock the bike,
typically encoded as a numeric value. In the interpreter, this interaction is sim-
ulated by providing the Lender’s access code, the name of the function to be
invoked, and the corresponding unlock code, as illustrated below:
    ef6h4.offer()[1234]

Afterward, the prototype interpreter executes the body of the selected function,
allowing the contract to progress, by enabling the Borrower to initiate the pay-
ment for the rental. The pay function, in turn, schedules an event to be triggered
k hours later. For example, if k is set to 0.1, and the Borrower fails to return the
                                                        The Stipula Platform         7




    Fig. 1. The Visual Editor Interface: fields, assets, parties and the agreement



bike within 6 minutes, the event is activated automatically. As a consequence,
the entire wallet balance is transferred to the Lender.


4   The visual code editor

Stipula is designed to support legal practitioners and individuals with little or
no familiarity with programming or formal languages. To enhance accessibility,
the language is complemented by a visual interface that facilitates the drafting
of contracts through schematic patterns and intuitive graphical representations.
This interface lowers the entry barrier for non-technical users, enabling them to
express complex contractual logic without writing code directly.
    The editor is implemented as a web-based application. Its initial interface is
shown in Figure 1. The interface provides dedicated input fields through which
the user can define the fundamental components of a contract, including its
name, the involved assets and fields, the parties to the agreement, and the es-
sential elements of the agreement clause. This structured input method simpli-
fies the contract creation process and ensures that the resulting code adheres
to the language’s syntax and semantics. The bottom-right window contains the
code of the contract (in the interface we have inserted the components of the
Bike_Rental contract).
8      C. Laneve




                   Fig. 2. The Visual Editor Interface: functions


    Following the same visual design, the editor also supports the definition of
functions and events. In these cases, the interface provides graphical tools that
guide the user in composing valid statements by offering selectable templates
for each language construct – for example, update operations such as x+1 →
x or asset transfers like x/2 ( x, A. This visual support ensures syntactic
correctness and lowers the barrier for non-technical users. Figure 2 shows a
snapshot of the editor displaying the implementation of the offer function.


5   Type inference in Stipula
Stipula adopts a type-free surface syntax, deliberately omitting explicit type
annotations. This design choice is motivated by the observation that standard
legal contracts do not typically involve typed declarations, and such annotations
may appear unintuitive or even opaque to non-technical users, particularly legal
practitioners. Despite the absence of type annotations, Stipula includes a type
inference system capable of automatically deriving the types of assets, fields, and
function arguments. This system enables early detection of programming errors
at compile time, thereby ensuring basic correctness and improving reliability. In
this section, we outline the main design principles and technical foundations of
the type inference system.
    The Stipula interpreter has the following primitive types

           T ::=    real | bool | string | time | asset

that mirror the set of values of the language: real numbers, booleans, strings,
time values, and assets. In the current prototype a time value is a real num-
ber representing hours. For exampl, the relative time expressions now + 2.0
means two hours later (with respect to the execution of the enclosing function)
and now + 0.5 means 30 minutes. Stipula also admits absolute time values as
the date "2022/1/1:00:15"T. With respect to the asset type, the current im-
plementation does not yet distinguish between divisible and indivisible assets.
                                                      The Stipula Platform       9

Each asset is represented as a sequence of digits, which may encode either a
unique identifier or a numerical amount. This simplification reflects the current
state of the system, but future releases will refine this model by introducing an
explicit distinction between divisible and indivisible assets. For instance, in the
Bike_Rental contract, the wallet asset is considered divisible, as demonstrated
by the operation at line 19.
    The type inference system in Stipula largely follows standard techniques. It
begins by associating distinct type variables to each identifier in the program
and proceeds by traversing the code to collect a set of type constraints. Once
parsing is complete, these constraints are resolved using a unification algorithm,
and the type variables are substituted with their inferred types (see [31] for a
comprehensive overview of the method). A notable innovation in our approach
is that type inference is re-executed after each function invocation, allowing the
system to refine the types of program elements based on the actual arguments
passed to the function and their subsequent assignment to fields. This dynamic
refinement enhances both flexibility and precision in the type system.
    As usual, type inference is executed the first time after the parsing. In the
case of Bike_Rental, the interpreter returns

   TYPE CHECKING ===
   Assets:
       wallet type: Asset
       bike type: Asset
   Fields:
       cost type: Real
       k type: Time
   Functions:
       Lender.offer()[Asset]
       Borrower.pay()[Asset]
       Borrower.end()[]
   ==================

As the reader may observe, following the initial type inference phase, no type
variables remain in the program: the types of all elements – fields, assets, and
functions – are fully resolved. While this outcome may appear straightforward
for assets and functions in the Bike_Rental contract, it is less immediately
evident in the case of fields. For example, the field k is inferred to have type
Time due to its occurrence within a time expression. Similarly, the field cost is
assigned type Real because of the equality “x == cost” at line 11. Since x is an
asset and assets in this context represent real-valued quantities, the unification
process infers cost to also have type Real.
    If the equality “x == cost” is removed from the contract, the type inference
system is no longer able to deduce a concrete primitive type for cost. As a result,
the system outputs:

   . . .
       cost type: Type0
10      C. Laneve

This is because, in the absence of a usage context that constrains its type, cost
remains unconstrained and retains its original type variable (Type0) that cannot
be resolved to a specific primitive type.
   The type of cost is determined after the agreement, once the Lender and the
Borrower have decided its initial value. In fact the system, at that point, will
return the refined type:
     . . .
         cost type: Real


6    Spotting unreachable clauses

A substantial problem in the legal contract domain is spotting normative clauses,
either functions or events, that will be never applied. In fact, it is possible,
that an unreachable clause is considered too oppressive by one of the parties
(take, for instance, the event of the Article 3 in Section 2), thus making the
legal relationship fail. In [16], we established that the interplay between state
evolution, temporal constraints, and non-determinism renders the unreachability
problem – i.e., determining whether a clause can never be executed – undecidable.
As a consequence, no complete algorithm can exist for solving this problem in
general. Therefore, our analysis must necessarily be conservative: we can aim at
a sound analyzer that can safely identify unreachable clauses, though it may not
detect all such cases. One such analyzer has been developed in [26], and it is
now integrated into the Stipula workbench. In the following, we outline the core
design principles that guided its development.
    The unreachability analyzer determines the set of reachable clauses through a
closure operation based on a fixpoint technique. A key challenge in this analysis
is the detection of time anomalies – clauses whose execution times are incom-
patible with the overall behaviour of the contract. To address this issue, the
analyzer operates over logical times, which are symbolic abstractions represent-
ing the system clock at runtime, approximated statically. A clause is included in
the set of reachable clauses only if its associated logical time is consistent with
the logical time of the computation leading to it. If the resulting constraints over
logical times are unsatisfiable, the corresponding clauses are deemed unreachable
and reported as such. A major complication arises from the presence of cyclic be-
haviours, which induce infinite computations and make direct consistency checks
intractable. To circumvent this, we introduce the notion of linear traces – finite
surrogates of computations in which each clause appears at most once. These
traces are well-suited for static time reasoning due to their finiteness, but they
lack the expressiveness to fully capture the semantics of cyclic behaviours. To
maximize coverage, we adopt a hybrid strategy: the analyzer applies time-based
reasoning to acyclic clauses using logical times, while reverting to a standard, un-
timed analysis for clauses involved in cycles. This combination balances precision
and tractability, enabling the detection of many practical cases of unreachability
despite the underlying undecidability of the problem.
                                                      The Stipula Platform       11

   For instance, applying the analyzer to the Bike_Rental contract yields a
comprehensive diagnostic trace, which concludes with the following summarized
result:
    "unreachable_code": []
The analyzer’s output includes a list of the clauses examined, along with the set
of linear traces computed – referred to as R in the implementation. A clause is
reported under the unreachable_code section if it does not appear in any linear
trace, indicating that it cannot be executed in any feasible execution path. For
example, consider the Bike_Rental contract: if a typographical error occurs at
line 14, where @Usng is written instead of the intended @Using, the analyzer will
produce the following error message:
    "unreachable_code": [ "ev(’Usng’, ’Ev’, 14, ’End’)" ]
where 14 is the line number of the event of Bike_Rental.
   The unreachability analyzer is also capable of identifying clauses that are
conditionally reachable. This situation arises, for example, when the time ex-
pressions associated with events depend on contract fields (as illustrated by the
Bike_Rental contract). In such cases, the continuation of a contract may be
possible only under specific conditions on field values?for instance, the analyzer
may report a reachability constraint of the form
    "reachability constraint": [ x >= 5 ]
At present, our analyzer incorporates a lightweight constraint-solving mecha-
nism. It performs partial evaluations that exploit the additive structure of time
expressions, which suffices to detect straightforward conditions. However, its ca-
pabilities are limited: in particular, it does not compute transitive closures of
constraints or reason about more complex dependencies. A natural next step in
the development of the prototype is to integrate the analyzer with an established,
off-the-shelf constraint solver, thereby enhancing its precision and enabling it to
capture richer classes of conditional reachability scenarios.


7    Verifying liquidity

Liquidity is a fundamental security property for any program that manages
assets, such as those written in Stipula. A Stipula contract is said to be liquid if
no asset remains indefinitely locked within the program – i.e., all resources are
ultimately redeemable by at least one of the involved parties [3]. For instance,
a contract violates liquidity if the body of a function fails to utilize resources
transferred by the caller during invocation. Similarly, liquidity is compromised
if the contract terminates with any asset holding a non-zero value – indicating
that the resource has not been fully consumed or returned.
    The concept of liquidity has been studied extensively, and multiple formaliza-
tions exist in the literature. In our previous work [10, 25], we adopt the notion of
multiparty strategyless liquidity, as defined in the taxonomy of [3, 1]. This model
12      C. Laneve

assumes cooperative behavior: all parties to the contract invoke the functions
made available to them, without adversarial strategies or omissions.
    Our liquidity analyzer is based on a type system that symbolically tracks the
effects of functions on assets using abstract names. The system ensures a cor-
rectness property, which guarantees that the inferred (liquidity) type of the final
state of a computation soundly over-approximates the actual runtime state. This
allows us to conservatively verify liquidity by checking whether, in all feasible
computations, the symbolic asset values at termination are zero – thus ensuring
that no residual resources remain trapped within the contract.
    We identify two liquidity properties. The first one is h-separate liquidity: if
an asset h becomes not-empty in a state then there is a continuation where h
is empty in its final state. While h-separate liquidity is satisfactory in contracts
where assets are separated (no asset field is moved to another asset field, for
instance when pairwise different assets have different categories, e.g. euros, cars,
houses), it is inadequate in unrestricted contracts that move assets between asset
fields. In these cases, the following stronger property is more reasonable: if an
asset becomes not-empty in a state then there is a continuation where all the
assets are empty in its final state.
    For the two properties, h-separate liquidity and liquidity, we have designed
two analysis algorithms with different computational costs and precision accu-
racies. The computational cost of the less precise algorithm is quadratic with
respect to the number of functions. The second algorithm is more precise be-
cause, for instance, it accepts contracts that empty assets by means of several
function invocations. However, more precision requires more complexity because
one has to analyze computations. The crucial issue of the analysis is therefore
designing a terminating algorithm given that computations may be infinitely
many because contracts may have cycles. For this reason we restrict to compu-
tations whose length is bound by a value (actually we found more reasonable
computations where every function can be invoked a bounded number of times).
The computational cost of k-separate liquidity and liquidity algorithms is higher
than the previous case: it is exponential with respect to the number of functions.
It is important to note that the algorithms assume all clauses in the contract
are reachable. Consequently, as a preliminary step, they verify the absence of
unreachable clauses, as discussed in Section 6 (in [10, 25] we circumvent this
assumption by restricting to the sub-language without events).
    We apply our liquidity analysis algorithm to the Bike_Rental contract. In
this case, both wallet-separate and bike-separate liquidity analyses are effec-
tive, as the two assets are handled independently and are never intermingled.
Focusing on wallet-separate liquidity, the algorithm proceeds as follows:

 – It first checks whether there exists any clause that may render the wallet
   asset non-empty. This condition is satisfied by the pay function, which in-
   creases the balance of wallet.
 – Next, the algorithm verifies whether, for every possible execution path fol-
   lowing this clause, there exists at least one subsequent clause that empties
   wallet. Since the contract is acyclic, the set of continuations is finite. In
                                                        The Stipula Platform        13

      this case, there are two distinct continuations: (1) the invocation of the end
      function and (2) the execution of the scheduled event at line 14.
    – In both cases, the analysis confirms that wallet is correctly emptied, as evi-
      denced by the annotations in the liquidity type system.
With respect to bike-separate liquidity, the algorithm proceeds as follows:
    – By analyzing the liquidity type system, it identifies that the offer function
      initializes (i.e., fills) the bike asset.
    – It then computes the set of possible continuations following this action. In
      this case, the continuations are: (1) pay; end and (2) pay; event_14.
    – Both these execution paths results in the bike asset being emptied – cf. the
      move operation at line 13. Therefore, the contract is also bike-separate liq-
      uid.
    While the theoretical framework of the liquidity analysis has been fully de-
veloped, the prototype implementation is still under development at the time of
writing.


8      Related Work
Dwivedi et al. [19] provide a systematic review of smart contract languages,
identifying critical features for drafting legally binding digital agreements. Some
of these features are present in existing languages such as Solidity [20], Flint [33],
Obsidian [9], and Move [8]. For instance, the representation of contracts as finite
state machines, caller-based access restrictions (e.g., Solidity modifiers, Flint’s ca-
pability blocks, Obsidian’s typestates), and the treatment of assets as primitive
data types are widely adopted [2, 7, 34, 14]. However, these languages are not de-
signed to model legal obligations explicitly and lack direct support for core legal
constructs such as agreement, obligation, prohibition, and judicial enforceability.
    In contrast, Stipula introduces constructs and patterns that establish a clear
correspondence between program logic and legal semantics. Its design enables
legal concepts like the meeting of the minds, permissions, and time-bound obli-
gations to be expressed directly and unambiguously in code.
    Several efforts have focused on transforming legal norms into formal specifi-
cations [22, 15, 24], offering semantic representations of rights and duties. How-
ever, these approaches often result in high-level specification languages that are
difficult to compile into executable code. Stipula fills this gap by acting as an
intermediate language – bridging the expressiveness of legal specifications with
the executability of programming languages like Java or Solidity. In this respect,
it shares motivations with Catala [30] and Orlando [4], which formalize specific
legal domains through a core calculus with human-readable syntax. Following
the idea of legal calculi [5], Stipula offers a minimal but expressive operational
model, formalized using concurrency theory.
    Unlike declarative legal markup languages such as OpenLaw [38], Lexon [29],
and Accord [35], which rely on parameterized templates and external smart con-
tracts, Stipula uses explicit programming patterns to capture legal constructs
14      C. Laneve

programmatically (see [12]). While Lexon attempts to bridge natural language
and code via structured English-like syntax, it lacks formal semantics, leaving
the behaviour of its contracts entirely to the generated Solidity code. In contrast,
Stipula provides built-in primitives – such as agreement and asset transfer – that
make the contract’s behaviour both explicit and verifiable.
    Stipula also differs significantly from financial contract domain specific lan-
guages like Marlowe[34] and Findel [7], which are built around algebraic combina-
tors tailored to financial logic. Marlowe ensures liveness through mandatory time-
outs and default paths, but this pull-based interaction model often results in indi-
rect and complex control flows. Stipula enables a more direct and agent-oriented
model, where roles, state transitions, and asset flows are clearly attributed, and
timeouts or escape clauses are optional and programmable. While Marlowe exe-
cutes on the Cardano blockchain using slot-based time, similar mechanisms can
be adapted to implement Stipula’s timed events on blockchain platforms [12].
    We argue that legal contracts are inherently more expressive than financial
ones, and require a richer programming model. Unlike Marlowe and Findel, where
an interpreter evaluates a fixed combinator structure, Stipula defines contracts
as programs that are compiled into executable artifacts (e.g., Java applications
or smart contracts). Its primitives – such as named states, functions, and events
– enable fine-grained control over contract behaviour and lifecycle.
    Finally, as regards Stipula visual editor, we have been inspired by visual
programming tools (e.g., Blockly [37], Babbage [32]) and legal markup languages
(e.g., SLCML [18]).


9    Conclusion

We have presented the Stipula platform, a comprehensive suite of tools designed
to help legal practitioners and developers write, test, debug, and manage smart
legal contracts effectively. The platform currently includes a visual code editor for
intuitive contract authoring in Stipula, an interpreter for automatic execution,
and a set of analyzers for verifying legally relevant properties such as clause
unreachability and the absence of frozen assets. Together, these components form
a unified toolchain that makes formal methods more accessible to non-experts
while retaining technical rigor.
    This paper has not included an empirical evaluation of the platform. As an
immediate step in future work, we plan to provide benchmarks, scalability stud-
ies, and case analyses that extend beyond the illustrative examples available in
the repository. In parallel, we aim to conduct user studies and collect evidence of
adoption among legal practitioners, thereby assessing the usability and practical
value of the editor and toolchain. Another priority is to evaluate the scope limi-
tations of the current analyzers: for instance, the unreachability analysis assumes
the absence of nested cycles, while the liquidity analysis requires bounded com-
putations. We intend to demonstrate that these restrictions do not significantly
limit applicability in practice.
                                                        The Stipula Platform       15

    Beyond these analyses, we are pursuing two broader research directions. The
first concerns the evolution of the Stipula language itself. Recent work has ex-
plored mechanisms to support amendments, which capture runtime modifica-
tions of contractual obligations (e.g., due to force majeure or hardship), and
the integration of norms, which reflects the fact that contractual obligations are
shaped not only by the clauses explicitly stated by the parties but also by implicit
legal provisions that ensure validity and regulate legal effects. These extensions
have been studied theoretically in [27, 28]; prototype support for amendments
is already available [13], whereas tooling for norm integration remains an open
challenge.
    The second direction involves the development of advanced verification tools.
We are currently investigating formal verification mechanisms to check both
partial and total correctness [23]. Our approach translates Stipula contracts into
JML-annotated Java code, which can then be analyzed using deductive verifi-
cation tools such as KeY [6]. Counterexamples produced during verification can
be mapped back to the contractual level, enabling systematic debugging. At
present, our verifier supports contracts with cycles without any state in common
(disjoint), and we have developed a prototype for a basic correctness analyzer.
Ongoing work aims to lift this restriction, thereby extending verification to con-
tracts with overlapping cycles and richer control flow, potentially through in-
teractive theorem proving or hybrid strategies combining automation with user
guidance.
    In summary, while the current Stipula platform already offers a practical
toolchain for authoring and analyzing legal contracts, substantial opportunities
remain for empirical validation, language extensions, and advanced verification
techniques. These lines of research will further strengthen the platform’s appli-
cability and reliability, and ultimately contribute to bridging the gap between
formal methods and legal practice.


References
 1. Massimo Bartoletti, Stefano Lande, Maurizio Murgia, and Roberto Zunino. Ver-
    ifying liquidity of recursive bitcoin contracts. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 18(1),
    2022.
 2. Massimo Bartoletti and Roberto Zunino. Bitml: A calculus for bitcoin smart con-
    tracts. In Proc. of Computer and Communications Security, CCS ’18, pages 83–100,
    New York, NY, USA, 2018. ACM.
 3. Massimo Bartoletti and Roberto Zunino. Verifying liquidity of Bitcoin contracts.
    In Proc. 8th International Conference on Principles of Security and Trust, pages
    222–247. Springer International Publishing, 2019.
 4. Shrutarshi Basu, Nate Foster, and James Grimmelmann. Property conveyances
    as a programming language. In Proc. 2019 ACM SIGPLAN Int. Symposium on
    New Ideas, New Paradigms, and Reflections on Programming and Software, On-
    ward! 2019, pages 128–142, New York, NY, USA, 2019. Association for Computing
    Machinery.
 5. Shrutarshi Basu, Anshuman Mohan, James Grimmelmann, and Nate Foster. Legal
    calculi. Technical report, ProLaLa 2022 ProLaLa Programming Languages and the
16      C. Laneve

    Law, 2022. At https://popl22.sigplan.org/details/prolala-2022-papers/6/Legal-
    Calculi.
 6. Bernhard Beckert, Richard Bubel, Daniel Drodt, Reiner Hähnle, Florian Lanzinger,
    Wolfram Pfeifer, Mattias Ulbrich, and Alexander Weigl. The Java verification tool
    KeY: A tutorial. In André Platzer, Kristin Yvonne Rozier, Matteo Pradella, and
    Matteo Rossi, editors, Proc. 26th Intl. Symp. on Formal Methods, Milan, Italy,
    volume 14934 of LNCS, pages 597–623, Cham, September 2024. Springer.
 7. Alex Biryukov, Dmitry Khovratovich, and Sergei Tikhomirov. Findel: Secure
    derivative contracts for ethereum. In Proc. Financial Cryptography and Data Secu-
    rity - FC 2017, volume 10323 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 453–467.
    Springer, 2017.
 8. Sam Blackshear and et al. Move: A language with programmable resources.
    https://developers.diem.com/main/docs/move-paper, 2021.
 9. Michael Coblenz, Reed Oei, Tyler Etzel, Paulette Koronkevich, Miles Baker, Yan-
    nick Bloem, Brad A. Myers, Joshua Sunshine, and Jonathan Aldrich. Obsidian:
    Typestate and Assets for Safer Blockchain Programming. ACM Trans. Program.
    Lang. Syst., 42(3), 2020.
10. Silvia Crafa and Cosimo Laneve. Liquidity analysis in resource-aware program-
    ming. In Proc. 18th Int. Conference on Formal Aspects of Component Software
    FACS 2022, volume 13712 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 205–221.
    Springer, 2022.
11. Silvia Crafa and Cosimo Laneve. Programming legal contracts: A beginners
    guide to Stipula. In Wolfgang Ahrendt, Bernhard Beckert, Richard Bubel, and
    Einar Broch Johnsen, editors, The Logic of Software. A Tasting Menu of Formal
    Methods - Essays Dedicated to Reiner Hähnle on the Occasion of His 60th Birthday,
    volume 13360 of LNCS, pages 129–146, Cham, 2022. Springer.
12. Silvia Crafa, Cosimo Laneve, Giovanni Sartor, and Adele Veschetti. Pacta sunt ser-
    vanda: Legal contracts in Stipula. Science of Computer Programming, 225:102911,
    2023.
13. Silvia Crafa, Cosimo Laneve, and Adele Veschetti. Stipula Prototype, July 2022.
    Available on github: https://github.com/stipula-language.
14. Karl Crary and Michael J. Sullivan. Peer-to-peer affine commitment using bitcoin.
    In Proc. 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
    Implementation, PLDI ’15, pages 479–488, New York, NY, USA, 2015. Association
    for Computing Machinery.
15. Joost T. de Kruijff and H. Hans Weigand. Introducing commitruleml for smart
    contracts. In Proc. 13th Int. Workshop on Value Modeling and Business Ontologies
    (VMBO), volume 2383. CEUR-WS.org, 2019.
16. Giorgio Delzanno, Cosimo Laneve, Arnaud Sangnier, and Gianluigi Zavattaro. De-
    cidability problems for micro-stipula. In Proc. 27th Int. Conference COORDINA-
    TION 2025, volume 15731 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 133–152.
    Springer, 2025.
17. Erik Dervishi. Stipula workbench: An integrated environment to design, analyze,
    and execute stipula code. Bachelor’s thesis, University of Bologna, 2025.
18. Vimal Dwivedi, Alex Norta, Alexander Wulf, Benjamin Leiding, Sandeep Saxena,
    and Chibuzor Udokwu. A formal specification smart-contract language for legally
    binding decentralized autonomous organizations. IEEE Access, 9:76069–76082,
    2021.
19. Vimal Dwivedi, Vishwajeet Pattanaik, Vipin Deval, Abhishek Dixit, Alex Norta,
    and Dirk Draheim. Legally enforceable smart-contract languages: A systematic
    literature review. ACM Comput. Surv., 54(5), jun 2021.
                                                          The Stipula Platform        17

20. Ethereum. Solidity Documentation. https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.30/,
    2025.
21. Samuele Evangelisti. Analisi di Contratti Legali in Stipula. Bachelor’s thesis,
    University of Bologna, 2024.
22. Christopher K. Frantz and Mariusz Nowostawski. From institutions to code: To-
    wards automated generation of smart contracts. In Proc. 2016 IEEE 1st Inter-
    national Workshops on Foundations and Applications of Self* Systems (FAS*W),
    pages 210–215, 2016.
23. Reiner Hähnle, Cosimo Laneve, and Adele Veschetti. Formal Verification of Legal
    Contracts: A translation-based approach. In to appear in Proc. 20th Int. Conference
    on Integrated Formal Methods (iFM 2025), Lecture Notes in Computer Science.
    Springer, 2025.
24. Xiao He, Bohan Qin, Yan Zhu, Xing Chen, and Yi Liu. Spesc: A specification
    language for smart contracts. In Proc. 2018 IEEE 42nd Annual Computer Software
    and Applications Conference (COMPSAC), volume 01, pages 132–137, 2018.
25. Cosimo Laneve. Liquidity analysis in resource-aware programming. J. Log. Alge-
    braic Methods Program., 135:100889:1–18, 2023.
26. Cosimo Laneve. Reachability analysis in Micro-Stipula. In Proc. 26th International
    Symposium on Principles and Practice of Declarative Programming, PPDP 2024,
    pages 17:1–17:12. ACM, 2024.
27. Cosimo Laneve, Alessandro Parenti, and Giovanni Sartor. Legal contracts amend-
    ing with Stipula. In Sung-Shik Jongmans and Antónia Lopes, editors, Proc. 25th
    Int. Conf.COORDINATION, volume 13908 of LNCS, pages 253–270, Cham, 2023.
    Springer.
28. Cosimo Laneve, Alessandro Parenti, and Giovanni Sartor. Integration of Statutory
    Norms in Computable Contracts. submitted to a journal, September, 2025.
29. Lexon Foundation. Lexon Home Page. http://www.lexon.tech, 2019.
30. Denis Merigoux, Nicolas Chataing, and Jonathan Protzenko. Catala: A program-
    ming language for the law. Proc. ACM Program. Lang., 5(ICFP):1–29, August
    2021.
31. Benjamin C. Pierce. Types and Programming Languages. The MIT Press, 2002.
32. Christian Reitwiebner.         Babbage - a mechanical smart contract lan-
    guage. At https://medium.com/@chriseth/babbage-a-mechanical-smart-contract-
    language-5c8329ec5a0e, 2018.
33. Franklin Schrans, Susan Eisenbach, and Sophia Drossopoulou. Writing safe smart
    contracts in flint. In Proc. 2nd International Conference on Art, Science, and
    Engineering of Programming, Programming’18 Companion, pages 218–ĂŞ219, New
    York, USA, 2018. ACM.
34. Pablo Lamela Seijas, Alexander Nemish, David Smith, and Simon Thompson.
    Marlowe: implementing and analysing financial contracts on blockchain. In Proc.
    Workshop on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, pages 496–511. Springer
    International Publishing, 2020.
35. Open Source Contributors. The Accord Project. https://accordproject.org, 2018.
36. Elia Venturi. Implementazione di un’interfaccia grafica per la scrittura di contratti
    legali nel linguaggio Stipula. Bachelor’s thesis, University of Bologna, 2023.
37. Tim Weingaertner, Rahul Rao, Jasmin Ettlin, Patrick Suter, and Philipp Dublanc.
    Smart contracts using blockly: Representing a purchase agreement using a graphi-
    cal programming language. In Proc. 2018 Crypto Valley Conference on Blockchain
    Technology (CVCBT), pages 55–64, 2018.
38. Aaron Wright, David Roon, and ConsenSys AG.                   OpenLaw Web Site.
    https://www.openlaw.io, 2019.
