May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

Argument & Computation
Vol. 00, No. 00, Month 200x, 1–31

RESEARCH ARTICLE
An abstract framework for argumentation with structured arguments
Henry Prakken
Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University
& Faculty of Law, University of Groningen
(Received 00 Month 200x; final version received 00 Month 200x)
An abstract framework for structured arguments is presented that instantiates Dung’s (1995) abstract argumentation frameworks. Arguments are defined as inference trees formed by applying two kinds of inference
rules: strict and defeasible rules. This naturally leads to three ways of attacking an argument: attacking a
premise, attacking a conclusion and attacking an inference. To resolve such attacks, preferences may be
used, which leads to three corresponding kinds of defeat: undermining, rebutting and undercutting defeat.
The nature of the inference rules, the structure of the logical language on which they operate and the origin
of the preferences are, apart from some basic assumptions, left unspecified.
The resulting framework integrates work of Pollock, Vreeswijk and others on the structure of arguments
and the nature of defeat, and extends it in several respects. Various rationality postulates are proven to be
satisfied by the framework, and several existing approaches are proven to be a special case of the framework,
including assumption-based argumentation and DefLog.

1.

Introduction

In 1995 Phan Minh Dung introduced an abstract formalism for argumentation-based inference (Dung 1995), which assumes as input nothing else but a set (of arguments) ordered
by a binary relation (of attack). Although he thus fully abstracted from the structure of
arguments and the nature of the attack relation, he was still able to develop an extremely
interesting theory. His article was a breakthrough in three ways: it provided a general
and intuitive semantics for the consequence notions of argumentation logics (and for nonmonotonic logics in general); it made a precise comparison possible between different
systems (by translating them into his abstract format); and it made a general study of formal properties of systems possible, which are inherited by instantiations of his framework.
In consequence, Dung’s work has given an enormous boost to research in computational
argumentation. Yet it has also been criticised for not specifying the structure of arguments
and the nature of the attack relation, which makes it less suitable for modelling specific argumentation problems. I believe that such criticism fails to appreciate the nature of Dung’s
formalism. It is best seen not as a formalism for directly representing argumentation-based
inference problems but as a tool for analysing particular argumentation systems and for
developing a metatheory of such systems. As such it has been very successful: differences between particular systems can be characterised in terms of some simple notions,
and formal results established for the framework are inherited by its instantiations. This
was already illustrated by Dung (1995) with reconstructions of Pollock’s (1987) system,
various logic-programming semantics and Reiter’s (1980) default logic in his formalism.

This work was partially supported by a Distinguished Visitor grant from the Scottish Informatics and Computer Science
Alliance (SICSA). I thank Chris Reed and the School of Computing, University of Dundee, Scotland, for their hospitality
during the summer of 2009 and Chris Reed for encouraging me to write this paper. Floris Bex, Phan Minh Dung, Tom
Gordon, Sanjay Modgil, Leon van der Torre, Bart Verheij and Gerard Vreeswijk gave useful feedback on earlier versions
of this paper. Finally, I thank my former collaborators in the ASPIC project for working with me on previous versions of
the ASPIC framework.
ISSN: 1946-2166 print/ISSN 1946-2174 online
c 200x Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/1946216YYxxxxxxxx
http://www.informaworld.com

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

2

Nevertheless, it is true that when actual argumentation-based inference has to be modelled, Dung’s framework is by itself usually too abstract and instead an instantiated version of his approach should be used. However, here too abstraction is still possible and
worthwhile. The aim of this paper is to instantiate Dung’s abstract approach with a general
account of the structure of arguments and the nature of the defeat relation1 . The framework defines arguments as inference trees formed by applying two kinds of inference
rules, strict and defeasible rules. This naturally leads to three ways of attacking an argument: attacking a premise, attacking a conclusion and attacking an inference. To resolve
such attacks, preferences may be used, which leads to three corresponding kinds of defeat:
undermining, rebutting and undercutting defeat. To characterise them, some minimal assumptions on the logical object language must be made, namely that certain well-formed
formulas are a contrary or contradictory of certain other well-formed formulas. Apart
from this the framework is still abstract: it applies to any set of inference rules, as long
as it is divided into strict and defeasible ones, and to any logical language with a contrary
relation defined over it.
The choice for tree-structured arguments based on two types of inference rules arguably
is very natural both in light of logic and argumentation theory and when looking at argumentation as it occurs in human thinking and dialogue. The notion of arguments as trees
of inferences is very common in standard logic and in argumentation theory, and is the basis of many software tools for argument visualisation. Moreover, in actual argumentation
humans often express their arguments as claims supported with one or more premises,
which can in turn be supported with further premises, and so on. Finally, as will be further
explained in Section 4, the setup with general defeasible inference rules is very suited for
modelling reasoning with argumentation schemes (Walton et al. 2008).
The account offered in this paper is not completely new. In fact, a rhetorical aim of the
paper is to counter the idea that the computational study of argumentation started with
Dung’s abstract approach and that only then researchers made it more concrete with accounts of the structure of arguments and the nature of defeat. As a matter of fact, much
work on these two issues was already done or going on at the time when Dung wrote
his paper, and some of this work is still state-of the art. For instance, both John Pollock
(1987, 1994) and Gerard Vreeswijk (1993, 1997) did important work on the structure of
arguments, while Pollock (1974, 1987) introduced an important distinction between two
kinds of defeat, namely rebutting defeat (attack on a conclusion) and undercutting defeat
(attack on an inference rule). One aim of the present paper is to profit from, integrate and
build on this and other important work as much as possible. As such this paper is a further development of the integration attempt that was undertaken in the European ASPIC
project (Amgoud et al. 2006). In this project, Vreeswijk’s formalisation of the structure of
arguments was combined with Pollock’s definitions of rebutting and undercutting defeat
in a way that also used insights from other work. The result was a characterisation of a set
of tree-structured arguments ordered with a binary defeat relation, so that an instantiation
of Dung’s abstract approach was achieved and any of Dung’s semantics could be used to
compute the acceptability status of the structured arguments.
The ASPIC framework was developed by Leila Amgoud, Martin Caminada, Claudette
Cayrol, Marie-Christine Lagasquie-Schieux, myself and Gerard Vreeswijk, and was first
reported in a European project deliverable (Amgoud et al. 2006). The added expressiveness compared to Dung’s abstract formalism gave rise to further work by Caminada and
Amgoud (2007) on rationality postulates for systems instantiating the ASPIC framework.
The aim of this work was to propose the idea of rationality postulates and to criticise
some specific rule-based argumentation systems for failing to satisfy them. For this aim

1 For reasons explained in Section 3 this paper will rename Dung’s attack relations to ‘defeat’ relations and reserve the term

‘attack’ for something else.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

3

only a simplified version of the ASPIC framework was needed, without preferences and
without the notion of a knowledge base. Moreover, the examples discussed by Caminada
and Amgoud (2007) were all with domain-specific inference rules instead of with general
inference patterns, which in effect somewhat obscured the potential of the framework to
be a general account of structured argumentation.
By contrast, the present paper aims to present the ASPIC framework as a general abstract model of argumentation with structured arguments.1 To achieve this aim, the ASPIC
framework will be extended and generalised in four respects.
(1) A third way of argument attack, namely premise attack or ‘undermining’ will be
added, in a way inspired by Vreeswijk’s (1993, Ch. 8) combination of “plausible”
and “defeasible” argumentation. Apart from the naturalness of having all three
kinds of attack in a general framework for argumentation, this will make it easier
to formalise argument schemes in the framework and it will make it possible to
regard existing systems with premise attack as special cases of the framework.
(2) The three notions of attack will be generalised from the notion of contradiction
between formulas ϕ and ¬ϕ to an abstract relation of contrariness between formulas which is not necessarily symmetric. This idea is taken from Bondarenko
et al. (1997) and Verheij (2003) and will help in showing that their systems are a
special case of the present framework.
(3) Four types of premises will be distinguished, inspired by a similar distinction of
Gordon et al. (2007).
(4) Attack relations will be partly resolved with preference orderings on arguments,
defeasible rules and the knowledge base (although Amgoud et al. 2006 also has
preferences, the results of Caminada and Amgoud 2007 do not cover them).
It will then be investigated to what extent the results of Caminada and Amgoud (2007) on
rationality postulates generalise to the thus extended ASPIC framework. The final aim of
this paper is to compare the resulting framework with recent related work. It will turn out
that assumption-based argumentation (Bondarenko et al. 1997, Dung et al. 2006, 2007),
DefLog (Verheij 2003) and Amgoud and Cayrol (2002)’s version of deductive argumentation are special cases of this paper’s version of the ASPIC framework.

2.

Dung’s abstract argumentation frameworks

First without explanation the basic concepts and insights of Dung’s abstract argumentation
approach are listed. For a state-of the art introduction see Baroni and Giacomin (2009).
Definition 2.1 : [Abstract argumentation framework] An abstract argumentation framework (AF ) is a pair hA, Def i. A is a set arguments and Def ⊆ A × A is a binary relation
of defeat. We say that an argument A defeats an argument B iff (A, B ) ∈ Def .
Definition 2.2 : [Conflict-free, Defence] Let B ⊆ A.
• A set B is conflict-free iff there exist no Ai , Aj in B such that Ai defeats Aj .
• A set B defends an argument Ai iff for each argument Aj ∈ A, if Aj defeats Ai , then
there exists Ak in B such that Ak defeats Aj .

Definition 2.3 : [Acceptability semantics] Let B be a conflict-free set of arguments, and
let F : 2A 7→ 2A be a function such that F(B) = {A | B defends A}.

1 In this paper the term ‘framework’ will be used to denote the general model, to highlight that it can be instantiated in

various ways (such instantiations will in turn be called argumentation systems). This contrasts with Dung’s (1995) use of
the term ‘argumentation framework’, which denotes a specific set of arguments with a specific attack relation. In the present
paper such specific inputs to an argumentation system will be called argumentation theories.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

4

• B is admissible iff B ⊆ F(B).
• B is a complete extension iff B = F(B).
• B is a grounded extension iff it is the smallest (w.r.t. set-inclusion) complete extension.
• B is a preferred extension iff it is a maximal (w.r.t. set-inclusion) complete extension
(or, equivalently, if B is a maximal (w.r.t. set inclusion) admissible set).
• B is a stable extension iff it is a preferred extension that defeats all arguments in A\B .

Note that this implies that each grounded, preferred or stable extension of an AF is also
a complete extension of that AF . Some other known results are that
• the grounded extension is indeed unique but all other semantics allow for multiple
extensions of an AF ;
• each AF has a grounded and at least one preferred and complete extension, but there
are AF s without stable extensions;
• the grounded extension of an AF is contained in all other extensions of that AF .

3.

Argumentation systems with structured arguments

In this section the arguments of Dung’s argumentation frameworks are given structure and
its defeat relation is defined in terms of the structure of arguments plus external preference information. Apart from this, the resulting formalism is still as abstract as possible,
allowing for different logical languages, different sets of inference rules for building arguments and different preference orderings. The framework uses Vreeswijk’s (1993, 1997)
definition of the structure of arguments and then adds Pollock’s (1987, 1994) distinction
between rebutting and undercutting attack, as well as a variant of the notion of premise attack proposed by Vreeswijk (1993, Ch. 8). These notions are then generalised to languages
with arbitrary relations of contrariness and contradiction between well-formed formulas.
Then the three notions of attack are combined into a notion of defeat in a way inspired by
Vreeswijk (1993, Ch. 8) and Prakken and Sartor (1997). It is this combination that makes
it possible to regard the system as an instantiation of Dung’s abstract framework.
The resulting framework unifies two ways to capture the defeasibility of reasoning.
Some, e.g. Amgoud and Cayrol (2002), Besnard and Hunter (2008), Bondarenko et al.
(1997), Verheij (2003), locate the defeasibility of arguments in the uncertainty of their
premises, so that arguments can only be attacked on their premises. Others, e.g. Pollock
(1994), Vreeswijk (1997), instead locate the defeasibility of arguments in the riskiness of
their inference rules: in these logics inference rules are of two kinds, being either deductive or defeasible, and arguments can only be attacked on their applications of defeasible
inference rules. Typically, in this approach inconsistency of the knowledge base makes
the system collapse. Vreeswijk (1993, Ch. 8) called these two approaches plausible and
defeasible reasoning: he described plausible reasoning as sound (i.e, deductive) reasoning
on an uncertain basis, and defeasible reasoning as unsound (but still rational) reasoning on
a solid basis. In his chapter 8, Vreeswijk attempted to combine both forms of reasoning in
a single formalism, but since then most formal accounts of argumentation have modelled
either only plausible or only defeasible reasoning.
3.1.

Basic definitions

The basic notion of the present framework is that of an argumentation system, which extends the familiar notion of a proof system with a distinction between strict and defeasible
inference rules 1 and a preference ordering on the defeasible inference rules.
1 Pollock (1987, 1994) calls these ‘conclusive’ and ‘prima facie reasons’.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

5

Definition 3.1 : [Argumentation system] An argumentation system is a tuple AS =
(L, − , R, ≤) where
• L is a logical language,
• − is a contrariness function from L to 2L ,
• R = Rs ∪ Rd is a set of strict (Rs ) and defeasible (Rd ) inference rules such that
Rs ∩ Rd = ∅,
• ≤ is a partial preorder on Rd .

Amgoud et al. (2006) and Caminada and Amgoud (2007) assume that arguments are
expressed in a logical language that is left unspecified except that it is closed under classical negation. In this paper this assumption will be generalised in two ways. Firstly, nonsymmetric conflict relations between formulas will be allowed, such as the contrariness
relation of Bondarenko et al. (1997) (which captures, for instance, negation as failure)
and its inverse, the dialectical negation of Verheij (2003) (which means ‘it is defeated
that’). Secondly, in addition to classical negation, other symmetric conflict relations will
be allowed, so that, for instance, formulas like ‘bachelor’ and ‘married’ can, if desired, be
declared contradictory without having to reason with an axiom ¬(bachelor ∧ married).
Definition 3.2 : [Logical language] Let L, a set, be a logical language and − a contrariness function from L to 2L . If ϕ ∈ ψ then if ψ 6∈ ϕ then ϕ is called a contrary of ψ ,
otherwise ϕ and ψ are called contradictory. The latter case is denoted by ϕ = −ψ (i.e.,
ϕ ∈ ψ and ψ ∈ ϕ).
In examples with classical negation ¬, it will be assumed that ¬ϕ ∈ ϕ and ϕ ∈ ¬ϕ.
Now that the notion of negation has been generalised, the same must be done with the
notion of consistency.
Definition 3.3 : [consistent set] Let P ⊆ L. P is consistent iff ∄ ψ , ϕ ∈ P such that
ψ ∈ ϕ, otherwise it is inconsistent.
Note that this is a weak form of consistency, determined by whether a set contains contrary
or contradictory formulas. Caminada and Amgoud (2007) call this direct consistency and
they call consistency of the closure of a set under strict inference indirect consistency.
Arguments are built by applying inference rules to subsets of L. Inference rules are
either strict or defeasible. This distinction goes back to Lin and Shoham (1989), Pollock
(1987) and Vreeswijk (1993), as does the idea of abstracting from their nature.
Definition 3.4 : [Strict and defeasible rules] Let ϕ1 , . . ., ϕn , ϕ be elements of L.
• A strict rule is of the form ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn → ϕ, informally meaning that if ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn
hold, then without exception it holds that ϕ.
• A defeasible rule is of the form ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn ⇒ ϕ, informally meaning that if ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn
hold, then it presumably holds that ϕ.
ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn are called the antecedents of the rule and ϕ its consequent.

As usual in logic, inference rules will often be specified by schemes in which a rule’s
antecedents and consequent are metavariables ranging over L.
Arguments are constructed from a knowledge base which, inspired by Gordon et al.
(2007), is assumed to contain four kinds of formulas.
Definition 3.5 : [Knowledge bases] A knowledge base in an argumentation system
(L, − , R, ≤) is a pair (K, ≤′ ) where K ⊆ L and ≤′ is a partial preorder on K \ Kn .
Here K = Kn ∪ Kp ∪ Ka ∪ Ki where these subsets of K are disjoint and
• Kn is a set of (necessary) axioms. Intuitively, arguments cannot be attacked on their
axiom premises.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

6

• Kp is a set of ordinary premises. Intuitively, arguments can be attacked on their ordinary premises, and whether this results in defeat must be determined by comparing the
attacker and the attacked premise (in a way specified below).
• Ka is a set of assumptions. Intuitively, arguments can be attacked on their assumptions,
where these attacks always succeed.
• Ki is a set of issues. Intuitively, arguments of which the premises include an issue are
never acceptable: an issue must always be backed with a further argument.

(Gordon et al. 2007 call ordinary premises “assumptions”, they regard assumptions as
the contradictories of “exceptions” and they call issues “ordinary premises”. Their counterpart to axioms is “accepted” and “rejected” statements.) As explained by Gordon et al.
(2007), the category of issue premises is useful if an argumentation system is embedded
in a dialogical context, defining the acceptability status of arguments relative to a stage in
a dialogue. For example, in legal proceedings legal claims that are not backed by factual
evidence usually do not stand: for instance, an argument ‘we have a contract by Section
X of the Civil Code since I made an offer and you accepted’ will be unacceptable as long
as no factual evidence for the offer and acceptance is provided. In the present framework
this can be captured by giving the non-supported premises issue status.
3.2.

Arguments

Next the arguments that can be constructed from a knowledge base in an argumentation system are defined. Arguments can be constructed step-by-step by chaining inference
rules into trees. Arguments thus contain subarguments, which are the structures that support intermediate conclusions (plus the argument itself and its premises as limiting cases).
In what follows, for a given argument, the function Prem returns all the formulas of K
(called premises) used to build the argument, Conc returns its conclusion, Sub returns all
its sub-arguments, DefRules returns all the defeasible rules of the argument and, finally,
TopRule returns the last inference rule used in the argument.
Definition 3.6 : [Argument] An argument A on the basis of a knowledge base (K, ≤′ )
in an argumentation system (L, − , R, ≤) is:
(1) ϕ if ϕ ∈ K with:
Prem(A) = {ϕ},
Conc(A) = ϕ,
Sub(A) = {ϕ},
DefRules(A) = ∅,
TopRule(A) = undefined.
(2) A1 , . . . An → ψ if A1 , . . . , An are arguments such that there exists a strict rule
Conc(A1 ), . . . , Conc(An ) → ψ in Rs ,
Prem(A) = Prem(A1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ Prem(An ),
Conc(A) = ψ ,
Sub(A) = Sub(A1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ Sub(An ) ∪ {A},
DefRules(A) = DefRules(A1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ DefRules(An ),
TopRule(A) = Conc(A1 ), . . . Conc(An ) → ψ .
(3) A1 , . . . An ⇒ ψ if A1 , . . . , An are arguments such that there exists a defeasible
rule Conc(A1 ), . . . , Conc(An ) ⇒ ψ in Rd ,
Prem(A) = Prem(A1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ Prem(An ),
Conc(A) = ψ ,
Sub(A) = Sub(A1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ Sub(An ) ∪ {A},
DefRules(A)
=
DefRules(A1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ DefRules(An ) ∪
{Conc(A1 ), . . . Conc(An ) ⇒ ψ},
TopRule(A) = Conc(A1 ), . . . Conc(An ) ⇒ ψ .

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

7

Example 3.7 Consider a knowledge base in an argumentation system with
Rs =
Rd =
Kn =
Kp =
Ka =

{p, q → s; u, v → w}
{p ⇒ t; s, r, t ⇒ v}
{q}
{p, u}
{r}

An argument for w is displayed in traditional proof-tree format in Figure 1, where a single
line stands for a strict inference and a double line for a defeasible inference. The type of
a premise is indicated with a superscript. Formally the argument and its subarguments are

Figure 1. An argument

written as follows:
A1 : p
A2 : q
A3 : r
A4 : u

A5 : A1 ⇒ t
A6 : A1 , A2 → s
A7 : A5 , A3 , A6 ⇒ v
A8 : A7 , A4 → w

We have that
Prem(A8 ) =
Conc(A8 ) =
Sub(A8 ) =
DefRules(A8 ) =
TopRule(A8 ) =

{p, q, r, u}
w
{A1 , A2 , A3 , A4 , A5 , A6 , A7 , A8 }
{p ⇒ t; s, r, t ⇒ v}
v, u → w

Definition 3.8 : [Argument properties] An argument A is
• strict if DefRules(A) = ∅;
• defeasible if DefRules(A) 6= ∅;
• firm if Prem(A) ⊆ Kn ;
• plausible if Prem(A) 6⊆ Kn .

We write S ⊢ ϕ if there exists a strict argument for ϕ with all premises taken from S , and
S |∼ ϕ if there exists a defeasible argument for ϕ with all premises taken from S .
Example 3.9 In Example 3.7 the argument A2 is strict and firm, while A1 , A3 , A4 and
A6 are strict and plausible and A5 , A7 and A8 are defeasible and plausible. Furthermore,
we have that K ⊢ p, K ⊢ q , K ⊢ r, K ⊢ u, K ⊢ s and K |∼ t, K |∼ v , K |∼ w.
(From hereon the theory will be left implicit if there is no danger for confusion.)
Now that the notion of an argument has been defined, orderings on arguments can be
considered. Below  is a partial preorder such that A  B means that B is at least as
‘good’ as A. As usual A ≺ B means A  B and B 6 A.
In Section 6 two ways will be discussed to define  as a function from the orderings ≤
on Rd and ≤′ on K. However, the present framework allows for any partial preorder on
arguments that satisfies two basic assumptions (taken from Vreeswijk 1993).

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

8

Definition 3.10 : [Admissible argument orderings] Let A be a set of arguments. Then a
partial preorder  on A is an argument ordering iff
(1) if A is firm and strict and B is defeasible or plausible, then B ≺ A;
(2) if A = A1 , . . . An → ψ then for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, A  Ai and for some 1 ≤ i ≤
n, Ai  A.
(Vreeswijk also assumes that an argument cannot be stronger than its weakest subargument but in Section 6 the so-called ‘last-link’ principle will be discussed, which violates
this assumption.) The first condition says that strict-and-firm arguments are stronger than
all other arguments, while the second condition says that a strict inference cannot make
an argument weaker or stronger.
Definition 3.11 : [Argumentation theories] An argumentation theory is a triple AT =
(AS , KB , ) where AS is an argumentation system, KB is a knowledge base in AS and
 is an argument ordering on the set of all arguments that can be constructed from KB in
AS (below called the set of arguments on the basis of AT ).

3.3.

Attack and defeat

Dung’s use of the term “attack” might at first sight lead to the belief that Dung’s framework has no place for preferences. However, Dung’s attack relation can also be seen as
abstracting from the use of preferences: in this view an attack relation in his framework
may be the result of applying preferences to a syntactic conflict. This view on Dung’s
attack relation was, to my knowledge, first used by Prakken and Sartor (1997), it was also
employed by Amgoud and Cayrol (2002) and it was the basis of Bench-Capon’s (2003)
value-based argumentation frameworks. It was also the reason why Prakken and Sartor
(1997) and Prakken and Vreeswijk (2002) replaced Dung’s term ‘attack’ with ‘defeat’,
to reflect that it may incorporate evaluative considerations. This convention will also be
adopted in the present paper, while the term ‘attack’ will be reserved for non-evaluative
syntactic notions of conflict. The idea then is that defeat is determined by attack plus
preference (except in some cases, where attack automatically leads to defeat).
The notion of a defeasible inference rule naturally leads to two notions of rebutting
and undercutting attack, introduced by Pollock (1974) and first formalised by Pollock
(1987). The third kind of attack, premise attack (in this paper called undermining) is a
natural addition (and for deductive inferences it is the only kind of attack) but highlights
the philosophical distinction between plausible and defeasible reasoning discussed above.
It was independently introduced by Vreeswijk (1993, Ch. 8) and Elvang-Göransson et al.
(1993). In line with Prakken and Sartor (1997), rebutting and undercutting attacks can
also be launched on subarguments. This is essential in making the system an instantiation
of Dung’s abstract framework.
3.3.1.

Attack

First the ways in which arguments can be attacked are defined. Recall that these are
just syntactic categories and do not reflect any preference between arguments. The first
way of attack corresponds to the case where one argument uses a defeasible rule of which
another argument says that it does not apply to the case at hand. Its definition assumes
that inference rules can be named in the object language; the precise nature of this naming
convention will be left implicit.
Definition 3.12 : [Undercutting attack] Argument A undercuts argument B (on B ′ ) iff
Conc(A) ∈ B ′ for some B ′ ∈ Sub(B) of the form B1′′ , . . . , Bn′′ ⇒ ψ .
Example 3.13 In Example 3.7 argument A8 can be undercut in two ways: by an argument
with conclusion A5 , which undercuts A8 on A5 , and by an argument with conclusion A7 ,

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

9

which undercuts A8 on A7 .
Undercutting attackers only say that there is some exceptional situation in which a
defeasible inference rule cannot be applied, without drawing the opposite conclusion.
Rebutting attacks do the latter: they provide a contrary or contradictory conclusion for a
defeasible (sub-)conclusion of the attacked argument.
Definition 3.14 : [rebutting attack] Argument A rebuts argument B on (B ′ ) iff
Conc(A) ∈ ϕ for some B ′ ∈ Sub(B) of the form B1′′ , . . . , Bn′′ ⇒ ϕ. In such a case
A contrary-rebuts B iff Conc(A) is a contrary of ϕ.
Example 3.15 In Example 3.7 argument A8 can be rebutted on A5 with an argument
for t and on A7 with an argument for v . Moreover, if t = −t then A5 in turn rebuts
any argument for t with a defeasible top rule. However, A8 itself does not rebut that
argument, except in the special case where w ∈ t. This shows that for three reasons
rebutting attack is not symmetric: the rebuttal can have a strict top rule, rebutting can be
contrary-rebutting and rebutting can be launched on a subargument. However, the present
example also shows that in the latter case, if the rebutting attack has a defeasible top rule
and is not of the contrary-rebutting kind, the directly rebutted subargument in turn rebuts
its attacker.
The final way of attack is an attack on a (non-axiom) premise.
Definition 3.16 : [undermining attack] Argument A undermines B (on ϕ) iff Conc(A) ∈
ϕ for some ϕ ∈ Prem(B) \ Kn . In such a case argument A contrary-undermines B iff
Conc(A) is a contrary of ϕ or if ϕ ∈ Ka .
Example 3.17 In Example 3.7 argument A8 can be undermined with an argument that
has conclusion p, r or u. If that attacker has a defeasible top rule and, say, a conclusion p
and does not contrary-undermine A8 , then p as an argument in turn rebuts the attacker.
The following example (based on Example 4 of Caminada and Amgoud 2007) illustrates the interplay between strict and defeasible rules in rebutting attack.
Example 3.18
A1 : WearsRing
B1 : Partyanimal

A2 : A1 ⇒ Married
B2 : B1 ⇒ Bachelor

A3 : A2 → ¬Bachelor
B3 : B2 → ¬Married

A3 rebuts B3 on its subargument B2 while B3 rebuts A3 on its subargument A2 . Note that
A2 does not rebut B3 , since B3 applies a strict rule; likewise for B2 and A3 .

3.3.2.

Defeat

Now that we know how arguments can be attacked, the argument ordering can be used
to define which attacks result in defeat. For undercutting attack no preferences will be
needed to make it result in defeat, since otherwise a weaker undercutter and its stronger
target might be in the same extension. This would be strange since then the extension
contains an argument that applies an inference rule of which another argument in the
same extension says that it should not be applied.1 . The same holds for the other two ways
of attack as far as they involve contraries (i.e., non-symmetric conflict relations between
formulas). The reason for this is that otherwise if a rebutting or undermining attacker is
weaker than its target, both may be in the same extension. For the remaining forms of
attack the argument ordering will be used to determine whether they result in defeat.

1 Modgil (2009) argues that in some contexts such extensions make sense. It seems that the formal results in Section 6

below on rationality postulates also hold for undercutting defeat with preferences, but this should be formally verified.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

10

Definition 3.19 : [Successful rebuttal] Argument A successfully rebuts argument B if A
rebuts B on B ′ and either A contrary-rebuts B ′ or A 6≺ B ′ .
This definition determines whether rebutting attack is successful by comparing the conflicting arguments at the points where they conflict. Thus in Example 3.18 the conflict
between A3 and B3 is resolved by comparing A3 with B2 and comparing B3 with A2 .
Now if B2 ≺ A3 (for example, since the married-rule is given priority over the bachelorrule) then A3 successfully rebuts B2 and B3 while B3 does not successfully rebut A2 or
A3 . If, by contrast, A2 6≺ B3 and B2 6≺ A3 then both A3 and B3 successfully rebut each
other (while A3 still successfully rebuts B2 and not vice versa, and likewise for B3 and
A2 ). Note also that if A3 is deleted from the example, then if B3 ≺ A2 , no argument in
the example is defeated. This may at first sight seem counterintuitive but this is due to the
fact that the example violates closure of Rs under transposition (cf. Section 5 below).
As noted by Caminada and Amgoud (2007), Example 3.18 also illustrates why Definitions 3.14 and 3.19 should not allow that a defeasible argument with a strict top rule can
be (successfully) rebutted on its final conclusion. The reason is that otherwise if all defeasible rules in the example are of equal preference, the set {A1 , A2 , B1 , B2 } is admissible,
which violates the rationality postulate of indirect consistency (see Section 6 below).
Definition 3.20 : [Successful undermining] Argument A successfully undermines B if
A undermines B on ϕ and either A contrary-undermines B or A 6≺ ϕ.
This definition exploits that an argument premise is also defined to be a subargument.
In Example 3.7 any argument for r successfully undermines A8 since it contraryundermines it since r ∈ Ka . The same holds for any argument for a contrary of p or
u while for arguments for contradictories of p or u this depends on the argument ordering
(which may in turn depend on the ordering ≤′ on K; see Definitions 6.14 and 6.17 below).
It remains to be discussed how the framework should deal with arguments that have
issue premises. As explained above, the idea is that arguments with issue premises are
always unacceptable. There are various ways to formalise this idea. One would be to let
a special designated argument, or perhaps all strict-and-firm arguments, defeat any argument with an issue premise (as in Modgil 2009, Prakken and Sartor 1997). Here another
solution is adopted: an argument can defeat another only if it has no issue premises. Then
in Definition 2.1 only sets B with no issue premises will be considered, so that no argument with issue premises is in any extension.
The three defeat relations can now be combined in an overall definition of ‘defeat’:
Definition 3.21 : [Defeat] Argument A defeats argument B iff no premise of A is an
issue and A undercuts or successfully rebuts or successfully undermines B . Argument A
strictly defeats argument B if A defeats B and B does not defeat A.
In the literature other combinations of these kinds of attack have been considered. For
example, Prakken and Sartor (1997) (who have no undermining) give precedence to undercutting defeat over rebutting defeat, so that if A successfully undercuts B while B
successfully rebuts A, nevertheless A strictly defeats B . It remains to be investigated how
crucial the present definition is for the results below.
Finally, argumentation theories can be linked to Dung-style argumentation frameworks.
Definition 3.22 : [Argumentation framework] An abstract argumentation framework
(AF ) corresponding to an argumentation theory AT is a pair <A, Def > such that:
• A is the set of arguments on the basis of AT as defined by Definition 3.6,
• Def is the relation on A given by Definition 3.21.

To leave arguments with issue premises out of any extension, Definition 2.1 should now
start with “Let B be a conflict-free set of arguments that have no issue premises ...”.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

11

It is now also possible to define a consequence notion for well-formed formulas. Several
definitions are possible. One is:
Definition 3.23 : [Acceptability of conclusions] For any semantics S and for any argumentation theory AT and formula ϕ ∈ LAT :
(1) ϕ is skeptically S-acceptable in AT if and only if all S -extensions of AT contain
an argument with conclusion ϕ;
(2) ϕ is credulously S-acceptable in AT if and only if there exists an S -extension of
AT that contains an argument with conclusion ϕ.
An alternative definition of skeptical acceptability is
(1) ϕ is skeptically S-acceptable in AT if and only if there exists an argument with
conclusion ϕ that is contained in all S -extensions of AT .
While the original definition allows that different extensions contain different arguments
for a skeptical conclusion, the alternative definition requires that there is one argument for
it that is in all extensions.

4.

Using the framework: domain-specific vs. general inference rules

The framework defined in the previous section can be used in two ways, depending on
whether the inference rules are domain-specific or not. The inference rules of argumentation systems are not part of the logical language L but are metalevel constructs. The
usual practice in standard logic is that inference rules express general patterns of reasoning, such as modus ponens, universal instantiation and so on. Yet Caminada and Amgoud
(2007) use the inference rules to represent domain knowledge, in line with a long tradition
in nonmonotonic logic of using domain-specific inference rules (e.g. Garcia and Simari
2004, Loui 1987, Nute 1994, Reiter 1980). The difference between both approaches is illustrated with the following example. Consider the information that all Frisians are Dutch,
that the Dutch are usually tall and that Wiebe is Frisian. With domain-specific inference
rules this can in a propositional language be represented as follows:
Rs
Rd
Kp

=
=
=

{Frisian → Dutch}
{Dutch ⇒ Tall }
{Frisian}

The argument that Wiebe is tall then has the form as displayed on the left in Figure 2.
With general inference rules the two rules must instead be represented in the object
language L. The first one can be represented with the material implication but for the
second one a connective for defeasible conditionals must be added to L and a defeasible
modus-ponens inference rule must be added for this connective. For example:
Rs
Rd
Kp

=
=
=

{ϕ, ϕ ⊃ ψ → ψ (for all ϕ, ψ ∈ L), . . .}
{ϕ, ϕ ; ψ ⇒ ψ (for all ϕ, ψ ∈ L), . . .}
{Frisian ⊃ Dutch, Dutch ; Tall , Frisian}

Then the argument that Wiebe is tall has the form as displayed on the right in Figure 2.
Although the present system can be used both ways, both Vreeswijk and Pollock intended their inference rules to express general patterns of reasoning, which is much more
in line with the role of inference rules in standard logic. Indeed, an important part of
John Pollock’s work was the study of general patterns of (epistemic) defeasible reasoning, which he called prima facie reasons. He formalised prima facie reasons for reasoning
patterns involving perception, memory, induction, temporal persistence and the statistical

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

12

Figure 2. Domain-specific vs. general inference rules

syllogism, as well as undercutters for these reasons. The ASPIC framework allows for
such general use of inference rules, by expressing the rules through schemes (in the logical sense, with metavariables ranging over L). When used thus, the framework becomes
a general framework for argumentation with structured arguments. It thus is also suitable
for modelling reasoning with argument schemes, which currently is an important topic
in the computational study of argument (cf. Walton et al. 2008). Argument schemes are
stereotypical non-deductive patterns of reasoning, consisting of a set of premises and a
conclusion that is presumed to follow from them. Uses of argument schemes are evaluated in terms of critical questions specific to the scheme. An example of an epistemic
argument scheme is the scheme from expert opinion (Walton et al. 2008, p. 310):
E is an expert in domain D
E asserts that P is true
P is within D
P is true

This scheme has six critical questions:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

How credible is E as an expert source?
Is E an expert in domain D?
What did E assert that implies P ?
Is E personally reliable as a source?
Is P consistent with what other experts assert?
Is E ’s assertion of P based on evidence?

A natural way to formalise reasoning with argument schemes is to regard them as defeasible inference rules and to regard critical questions as pointers to counterarguments
(this approach was earlier defended by Bex et al. 2003 and Verheij 2003). More precisely,
the three kinds of attack on arguments correspond to three kinds of critical questions of
argument schemes. Some critical questions challenge an argument’s premise and therefore point to undermining attacks, others point to undercutting attacks, while again other
questions point to rebutting attacks. In the scheme from expert opinion questions (2) and
(3) point to underminers (of, respectively, the first and second premise), questions (4),
(1) and (6) point to undercutters (the exceptions that the expert is biased or incredible
for other reasons and that he makes scientifically unfounded statements) while question
(5) points to rebutting applications of the expert opinion scheme. Thus we also see that
Pollock’s prima facie reasons are examples of epistemic argument schemes and that his
undercutters are negative answers to one kind of critical question.
Now one benefit of having undermining attack in addition to rebutting and undercutting
attack can be discussed in more detail: if the inference rules are supposed to be domainindependent, then representing facts with non-conditional inference rules (as done by
Caminada and Amgoud 2007) does not make sense.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

13

5.

Transposition and contraposition

Before it can be studied to what extent the present framework satisfies the rationality
postulates of Caminada and Amgoud (2007), first some technicalities concerning strict
inference rules must be discussed. To start with, Caminada and Amgoud define the notions
of a transposition of a strict rule and closure of sets of strict rules under transposition.
Definition 5.1 : [Transposition] A strict rule s is a transposition of ϕ1 , . . ., ϕn → ψ iff s
= ϕ1 , . . ., ϕi−1 , −ψ , ϕi+1 , . . ., ϕn → −ϕi for some 1 ≤ i ≤ n.
Definition 5.2 : [Transposition operator] Let Rs be a set of strict rules. Cltp (Rs ) is the
smallest set such that:
• Rs ⊆ Cltp (Rs ), and
• If s ∈ Cltp (Rs ) and t is a transposition of s then t ∈ Cltp (Rs ).

We say that Rs is closed under transposition iff Cltp (Rs ) = Rs .
Now the subclass of argumentation systems closed under transposition can be defined.
Definition 5.3 : [Closure under transposition] An argumentation system (L, − , R, ≤) is
closed under transposition if Rs = Cltp (Rs ). An argumentation theory is closed under
transposition if its argumentation system is.
Caminada and Amgoud (2007) also define the closure of a set of formulas under application of strict rules.
Definition 5.4 : [Closure of a set of formulas] Let P ⊆ L. The closure of P under the
set Rs of strict rules, denoted ClRs (P), is the smallest set such that:
• P ⊆ ClRs (P).
• if ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn → ψ ∈ Rs and ϕ1 , . . . , ϕn ∈ ClRs (P) then ψ ∈ ClRs (P).

If P = ClRs (P), then P is said to be closed.
It is also relevant whether strict inference satisfies contraposition.
Definition 5.5 : [Closure under contraposition] An argumentation system is closed under
contraposition if for all S ⊆ L, all s ∈ S and all ϕ it holds that if S ⊢ ϕ then S \ {s} ∪
{−ϕ} ⊢ −s. An argumentation theory is closed under contraposition if its argumentation
system is.
Closure under transposition does not imply closure under contraposition, as shown by
the following counterexample (in all examples below sets which are empty are not listed).
Example 5.6 Let Rs = Cltp ({p → q; p → r; p, r → s}). Then {p} ⊢ s but {−s} 6⊢ −p.
In general it neither holds that closure under contraposition implies closure under transposition, as shown by the following counterexample.
Example 5.7 Let Rs = {p → q; ¬q → r; r → ¬p; ¬r → q; p → ¬r}. Then Rs is not
closed under transposition, since it does not include ¬q → ¬p. Still we have
{p} ⊢ q and {¬q} ⊢ ¬p
{¬r} ⊢ q and {¬q} ⊢ r

{p} ⊢ ¬r and {r} ⊢ ¬p
{¬q} ⊢ r and {¬r} ⊢ q

So Rs satisfies contraposition.
However, contraposition does imply transposition in the following special case.
Proposition 5.8 : Consider any argumentation theory with L closed under classical
negation and − defined correspondingly. Then if Rs consists of all valid propositional
inferences then Rs is closed under contraposition and transposition.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

14

Note that the proposition does not hold if the condition ‘Rs consists of all valid propositional inferences’ is changed to ‘⊢ corresponds to propositional logic’. A counterexample
is any argumentation theory with a sound and complete axiomatisation of propositional
logic with modus ponens as the only inference rule.

6.

Rationality postulates

Dung’s semantics can be seen as rationality constraints on evaluating arguments in abstract argumentation frameworks. The refinement of his abstract approach with structured
arguments naturally leads to the question whether this additional structure gives rise to additional rationality constraints. Caminada and Amgoud (2007) gave a positive answer to
this question by proposing a number of ‘rationality postulates’ for what they called ‘rulebased argumentation’. Four of their postulates formulate constraints on any extension of
an argumentation framework corresponding to an argumentation theory:1
• Closure under subarguments: for every argument in an extension also all its subarguments are in the extension.
• Closure under strict rules: the set of conclusions of all arguments in an extension is
closed under strict-rule application.
• Direct consistency: the set of conclusions of all arguments in an extension is consistent.
• Indirect consistency: the closure of the set of conclusions of all arguments in an extension under strict-rule application is consistent.

Caminada and Amgoud (2007) proved for their version of the ASPIC framework that the
first two postulates are always satisfied while the two consistency postulates are satisfied
if the set of strict rules is consistent and closed under transposition. However, their version
of the ASPIC framework is considerably simpler than the present one. Firstly, it has no
knowledge base and facts must be represented as inference rules with empty antecedents;
because of this, arguments cannot be undermined. Furthermore, it assumes just a basic
ordering on arguments, according to which strict arguments are strictly preferred over
defeasible ones and nothing else. Finally, it has a special case of the present − function
from L to 2L , corresponding to classical negation. The task now is to investigate to which
extent the results of Caminada and Amgoud (2007) can be generalised to the present case.
The postulates of closure under subarguments and strict-rule application still hold unconditionally for the present framework. (Here that a given semantics is subsumed by
complete semantics means that any of its extensions also is a complete extension).
Proposition 6.1 : Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework as defined in Definition 3.22 and E any of its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by complete
semantics. Then for all A ∈ E : if A′ ∈ Sub(A) then A′ ∈ E .
Proposition 6.2 : Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework corresponding to an
argumentation theory, and E any of its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by
complete semantics. Then {Conc(A)|A ∈ E} = ClRs ({Conc(A)|A ∈ E}).
As for the two consistency postulates, Caminada and Amgoud’s results do not generalise unconditionally. Consider the following example.
Example 6.3 Let Rd = {⇒ p; ⇒ q} and Rs = {q → ¬p; p → ¬q}. Then we have
A: ⇒ p
B′: ⇒ q

B : B ′ → ¬p

1 Caminada and Amgoud (2007) propose similar postulates for the intersection of extensions but since their results on these

postulates directly follow from the ones for individual extensions, they will below be ignored.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

15

Now assume that A ≻ B , so B does not defeat A. However, A neither defeats B , since
B ’s last inference is strict. At first sight, it would seem that A can be extended with the
transposition of q → ¬p (i.e. with p → ¬q ) to an argument
A+ : A → ¬q

that rebuts B ’s subargument B ′ for q . Then since by condition (2) of Definition 3.10 a
strict continuation of an argument cannot make it weaker, B ′ ≺ A+ so A+ defeats B ′ .
Moreover, by the same conditions any argument defeats A if and only if it defeats A+ so
if A is in an extension E then by Proposition 6.2 A+ will be in E and therefore B will
not be in E since extensions are conflict-free.
However, this line of reasoning does not hold without a further assumption on the argument ordering. Consider a more complex variant of Example 6.3.
Example 6.4 Let Rd = {⇒ p; ⇒ q; ⇒ r} and Rs = {q, r → ¬p; q, p → ¬r; p, r →
¬q}. Then we have
A: ⇒ p
B′: ⇒ q

B ′′ : ⇒ r

B : B ′ , B ′′ → ¬p

The problem is that A cannot be extended with any transposition of q, r → ¬p to obtain
A+ unless it is combined with either B ′ or B ′′ but then A is extended with a defeasible
rule, so A+ might be weaker than A. This problem holds whenever B has more than one
maximal defeasible or plausible subargument.
However, assuming contraposition or transposition, direct consistency can still be
proven if it can also be assumed that there is a way to extend A with all but one of
B ’s maximal defeasible subarguments that is not weaker than the remaining one. In our
example this means that either A extended with B ′ is not weaker than B ′′ or A extended
with B ′′ is not weaker than B ′ . Intuitively this assumption seems acceptable given that A
is stronger than both B ′ and B ′′ . It is therefore to be expected that it will be satisfied by
many reasonable argument orderings. Since similar situations can arise with undermining
attack, the notion of a maximal fallible subargument is needed.
Definition 6.5 : [Maximal fallible subarguments] For any argument A, an argument A′ ∈
Sub(A) is a maximal fallible subargument of A if
(1) A′ ’s final inference is defeasible or A′ is a non-axiom premise; and
(2) there is no A′′ ∈ Sub(A) such that A′′ 6= A and A′ ∈ Sub(A′′ ) and A′′ satisfies
condition (1).
The set of maximal fallible subarguments of an argument A will be denoted by M (A).
Corollary 6.6 :

For any argument A it holds that Conc(M (A)) ⊢ Conc(A).

Definition 6.7 : [Reasonable argument orderings] Argument ordering  is reasonable if
it satisfies the following condition. Let A and B be arguments with contradictory conclusions such that B ≺ A. Then there exists a Bi ∈ M (B) and an A+ with A ∈ Sub(A+ )
such that Conc(A+ ) = −Conc(Bi ) and A+ 6≺ Bi .
A final problem to deal with is that in Example 6.3, Conc(A) could be a contrary of
Conc(B); the problem is that the solution with closure under contraposition and transposition does not apply to this case. Therefore the focus must be restricted to argumentation
theories that respect the intended use of assumptions and contraries.
Definition 6.8 :

An argumentation theory is well-formed if:

(1) no consequent of a defeasible rule is a contrary of the consequent of a strict rule;

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

16

(2) if ϕ ∈ Ka and ϕ is a contrary of ψ , then ψ 6∈ Kn ∪ Kp and ψ is not the conclusion
of a rule in R.
Condition (2) in effect says that assumptions can only be contraries of other assumptions. An example of an argumentation theory that is not well-formed is
Rs = {p → q}, Rd = {r ⇒ s, t ⇒ u}, Kp = {p, r}, Ka = {v}

and such that s is a contrary of q and v is a contrary of u. Then condition (1) of Definition 6.8 is violated since we have arguments A: p → q and B : r ⇒ s. Moreover, condition
(2) is violated since v ∈ Ka and t ⇒ u ∈ Rd .
Now it can be proven that under certain conditions an argumentation theory satisfies the
postulate of direct consistency.
Theorem 6.9 : Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework corresponding to a wellformed argumentation theory that is closed under contraposition or transposition and
has a reasonable argument ordering and a consistent ClRs (Kn ), and let E be any of
its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by complete semantics. Then the set
{Conc(A) | A ∈ E} is consistent.
Caminada and Amgoud (2007) also prove that their system satisfies the postulate of
indirect consistency. This follows from their Proposition 7, which says that if an argumentation theory satisfies closure and direct consistency, it also satisfies indirect consistency. Since in the present case the conditions of the proof of direct consistency had to be
strengthened, the same holds for indirect consistency.
Theorem 6.10 : Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework corresponding to a
well-formed argumentation theory that is closed under contraposition or transposition
and has a reasonable argument ordering and a consistent ClRs (Kn ), and let E be any
of its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by complete semantics. Then the set
ClRs ({Conc(A) | A ∈ E}) is consistent.
Corollary 6.11 : If the conditions of Theorem 6.10 are satisfied, then for any extension
E under a given semantics subsumed by complete semantics the set {ϕ | ϕ is a premise
of an argument in E} is consistent.
Concluding this section, two intuitively plausible argument orderings will be shown
to be reasonable, namely, the weakest-link and last-link orderings from Amgoud et al.
(2006). The versions below are slightly revised to make the principles arguably more intuitive. Both orderings define a strict partial order ≺s on sets in terms of a partial preorder
≤e on their elements, as follows: S1 ≺s S2 iff there exists an e1 ∈ S1 such that for all
e2 ∈ S2 it holds that e1 <e e2 .
The last-link principle prefers an argument A over another argument B if the last
defeasible rules used in B are less preferred than the last defeasible rules in A or, in case
both arguments are strict, if the premises of B are less preferred than the premises of A.
The concept of ‘last defeasible rules’ is defined as follows and is essentially the same as
Prakken and Sartor’s (1997) notion of a ‘relevant set’.
Definition 6.12 : [Last defeasible rules] Let A be an argument.
• LastDefRules(A) = ∅ iff DefRules(A) = ∅.
• If A = A1 , . . ., An ⇒ φ, then LastDefRules(A) = {Conc(A1 ), . . ., Conc(An ) ⇒ φ},
otherwise LastDefRules(A) = LastDefRules(A1 ) ∪ . . . ∪ LastDefRules(An ).

Corollary 6.13 :

LastDefRules(A) = {TopRule(A′ ) | A′ ∈ M (A)}.

An example with more than one last defeasible rule is with K = {p; q} and Rd = {p ⇒
r; q ⇒ s}. Then for argument A for r ∧s we have LastDefRules(A) = {p ⇒ r; q ⇒ s}.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

17

The above definition is now used to compare pairs of arguments as follows:
Definition 6.14 : [Last link principle] Let A and B be two arguments. Then A ≺ B iff
either
(1) condition (1) of Definition 3.10 holds; or
(2) LastDefRules(A) ≺s LastDefRules(B); or
(3) LastDefRules(A) and LastDefRules(B) are empty and Prem(A) ≺s Prem(B).
(Amgoud et al. 2006 do not include the second condition so if both arguments are strict
the ordering on the knowledge base is ignored.) This definition in effect compares sets on
their weakest elements.
Proposition 6.15 :

The last-link argument ordering is reasonable.

Consider the following example (taken from Prakken 1997) on whether people misbehaving in a university library may be denied access to the library.
Example 6.16 Let Kp = {Snores; Professor }, Rd =
{Snores ⇒r1 Misbehaves;
Misbehaves ⇒r2 AccessDenied ;
Professor ⇒r3 ¬AccessDenied }.

Assume that Snores <′ Professor and r1 < r2 , r1 < r3 , r3 < r2 , and consider the
following arguments.
A1 : Snores
B1 : Professor

A2 : A1 ⇒ Misbehaves
B2 : B1 ⇒ ¬AccessDenied

A3 : A2 ⇒ AccessDenied

To resolve the conflict between A3 and B2 , the rule sets to be compared are
LastDefRules(A3 ) = {r2 } and LastDefRules(B2 ) = {r3 }. Since r3 < r2 we have
that B2 ≺s A3 so A3 strictly defeats B2 .
The weakest-link principle considers not the last but all uncertain elements in an argument. It prefers an argument A over an argument B if A is preferred to B on both their
premises and their defeasible rules.
Definition 6.17 : [Weakest link principle] Let A and B be two arguments. Then A ≺ B
iff either condition (1) of Definition 3.10 holds; or
(1) Prem(A) ≺s Prem(B); and
(2) If DefRules(B) 6= ∅ then DefRules(A) ≺s DefRules(B).
(Amgoud et al. 2006 do not have the condition of (2), so that with two strict arguments
neither of them can be preferred.)
Proposition 6.18 :

The weakest-link argument ordering is reasonable.

Example 6.19 Consider again Example 6.16. With the weakest-link principle the outcome is different. To resolve the conflict between A3 and B2 , the rule sets to be compared
are now DefRules(A3 ) = {r1 , r2 } and DefRules(B2 ) = {r3 }. Since r1 < r3 we have
that DefRules(A3 ) ≺s DefRules(B2 ). Moreover, since Snores <′ Professor we also
have that Prem(A3 ) ≺s Prem(B2 ). Hence B2 now strictly defeats A3 .
Example 6.20 We finally return to Example 3.18. Let
r1 =
r2 =

WearsRing ⇒ Married
PartyAnimal ⇒ Bachelor

Note that since both arguments apply just one defeasible rule and no premise is attacked,
the weakest- and last-link ordering produce the same result. Now if r1 < r2 we have

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

18

that A3 strictly defeats B3 by successfully rebutting it on B2 , while if both r1 6< r2 and
r2 6< r1 then A3 and B3 defeat each other since A3 successfully rebuts B3 on B2 while
B3 successfully rebuts A3 on A2 .
7.

Self-defeat

As discussed by Pollock (1994) and Caminada and Amgoud (2007), self-defeating arguments can cause problems if argumentation systems are not carefully defined, particularly
if they include standard propositional logic. In the present framework two types of selfdefeating arguments are possible: serial self-defeat occurs when an argument defeats one
if its earlier steps, while parallel self-defeat occurs when the contradictory conclusions of
two or more arguments are taken as the premises for ⊥. Pollock (1994) gives an example
of serial self-defeat of the following form:
Example 7.1 Let Rd = {p ⇒ q}, Rs = { q → ¬A2 } and K = {p, q}. Then we have
A1 : p

A2 : A1 ⇒ q

A3 : A2 → ¬A2

(Read p as “witness John says that he is unreliable” and q as “witness John is unreliable”).
Argument A3 is self-defeating since it undercuts itself on A2 . This example is arguably
handled properly by preferred and grounded semantics, who both have E = {A1 } as the
only extension.
One of Pollock’ (1994) examples of parallel self-defeat has the following form.
Example 7.2 Let Rd = {p ⇒ q; r ⇒ ¬q; t ⇒ s} and K = {p, r, t} while Rs contains
all propositionally valid inferences. Then:
A1 : p
B1 : r
C1 : A2 , B2 → ⊥
D1 : t

A2 : A1 ⇒ q
B2 : B1 ⇒ ¬q
C2 : C1 → ¬s
D 2 : D1 ⇒ s

Here a problem arises since s can be any formula, so any defeasible argument unrelated to
A2 or B2 , such as D2 , can, depending on the rule priorities, be rebutted by C2 . Clearly, this
is extremely harmful, since the existence of just a single case of mutual rebutting defeat,
which is very common, could trivialise the system. In fact, of the semantics defined by
Dung (1995) this is only a problem for grounded semantics. Since all preferred/stable
extensions contain either A2 or B2 , argument C2 is not in any of these extensions so D2
is. However, if neither of A2 and B2 strictly defeats the other, then neither of them is in
the grounded extension so that extension does not defend D2 against C2 and therefore
does not contain D2 .
Pollock (1994) also discusses the following variant of this example (with the same
argumentation theory):
A1 : p
B1 : r
C1 : A2 , B2 → ¬s
D1 : t

A2 : A1 ⇒ q
B2 : B1 ⇒ ¬q

A3 : A2 → q ∨ ¬s

D 2 : D1 ⇒ s

Again with grounded semantics the problem is that s can be any formula, so any defeasible
argument unrelated to A2 or B2 can be rebutted by C1 .
According to Caminada (personal communication) the only way to solve this problem
is to make parallel self-defeat impossible. One way to implement this solution is to disallow arguments with a contradictory set of sub-conclusions. However, this affects the

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

19

proof of Theorems 6.9 and 6.10. The reason is that for such systems the argument A+ that
according to Lemma 10.1 can be constructed sometimes has to have contradictory subconclusions, as the following example (with a system closed under transposition) shows.
Example 7.3 Let p ∈ Kn , q ∈ Ka and Rs = Cltp ({p → t; q → r; q → s; r, s → ¬t}).
A1 : p
B1 : q

A2 : A1 → t
B2 : B1 → r

B3 : B1 → s

B4 : B2 , B3 → ¬t

Now if A2 is to be extended to an argument A+ that undermines B4 , then B1 must be
included in A+ .
An similar example for systems closed under contraposition is:
Example 7.4 Let Kp = {p, q, ¬p, ¬q} and let Rs consist of all valid propositional inferences. Then
A1 : p
B1 : ¬p

A1 : q
B2 : ¬q

A3 : A1 , A2 → p ∧ q
B3 : B1 , B2 → ¬(p ∧ q)

Note that M (B3 ) = Prem(B3 ). Now any addition of a premise of B3 to Prem(A3 ) makes
Prem(A3 ) inconsistent.
Since these problems only arise in particular argumentation systems and with particular
semantics, no general solution will be pursued here; instead such solutions are left for future research on instantiations of the framework. Note also that Examples 7.3 and 7.4 only
contain strict rules, so that the problem may also arise in assumption-based frameworks,
which will in the next section be proven to be a special case of the ASPIC framework.

8.

The relation with assumption-based argumentation

After having presented his fully abstract approach to argumentation, Dung joined Kowalski, Toni and others in their development of a more concrete version of his approach
(e.g. Bondarenko et al. 1997, Dung et al. 2006, 2007). In this approach arguments essentially are sets of formulas called “assumptions”, from which conclusions can be drawn
with strict inference rules. Arguments can be attacked with arguments that conclude to
the “contrary” of one of their assumptions. In fact, the extensions defined by the various
semantics of Bondarenko et al. (1997) are not sets of arguments but sets of assumptions.
However, Dung et al. (2007) showed that an equivalent fully argument-based formulation
can be given.
In this section it will be shown that assumption-based argumentation (ABA) is a special case of the present framework with only strict inference rules, only assumption-type
premises and no preferences. The proof will be given for the argument-based version of
Dung et al. (2007) and carries over to Bondarenko et al. (1997) by the equivalence result
of Dung et al. (2007).
First the main definitions of ABA are recalled (in the formulation of Dung et al. 2007).
Definition 8.1 : (Def. 2.3 of Dung et al. 2007.) A deductive system is a pair (L, R) where
• L is a formal language consisting of countably many sentences, and
• R is a countable set of inference rules of the form α1 , . . . , αn → α.1 α ∈ L is called
the conclusion of the inference rule, α1 , . . . , αn ∈ L are called the premises of the
inference rule and n ≥ 0.
1 In (Dung et al. 2007) the arrows are from right to left.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

20

Definition 8.2 : (Def. 2.5 of Dung et al. 2007.) An assumption-based argumentation
framework (ABF ) is a tuple (L, R, A, − ) where
• (L, R) is a deductive system.
• A ∈ L, A 6= ∅. A is the set of candidate assumptions .
• If α ∈ A, then there is no inference rule of the form α1 , . . . , αn → α ∈ R.
• − is a total mapping from A into L. α is the contrary of α.

The third condition amounts to a restriction to so-called flat ABF s. This restriction is
not entirely innocent, since in debates it may occur that someone first assumes a premise
and, after it is defeated, constructs an argument for it, in an attempt to rebut the defeater.
To make Dung et al.’s analysis apply to all stages of such a debate, assumptions should be
deleted from A as soon as they are supported with an argument.
Since the notion of an argument is central to the present concerns, the informal explanation of Dung et al. (2007, p. 646) will be quoted in (almost) full.
Deductions can be understood as proof trees: the root of the tree is labelled by the conclusion
of the deduction and the leaves are labelled by the premises supporting the deduction. For
every non-terminal node in the tree, there is an inference rule whose conclusion matches
the sentence labelling the node, and the children of the node are labelled by the premises
of the inference rule. (..) we define deductions as sequences of frontiers S1 , . . . , Sm of the
proof trees. Each frontier is represented by a multi-set, in which the same sentence can have
several occurrences, if it is generated more than once as a premise of different inference
steps. In order to generate proof trees, a selection strategy is needed to identify which node
to expand next. We formalise this selection strategy by means of a selection function, as in
the formalisation of SLD resolution. A selection function, in this context, takes as input a
sequence of multi-sets Si and returns as output a sentence occurrence in Si . We restrict the
selection function so that if a sentence occurrence is selected in a multi-set in a sequence
then it will not be selected again in any later multi-set in that sequence.

Essentially, a backward deduction thus presents one particular order in which an argument in the sense of Definition 3.6 can be constructed by reasoning backwards from the
conclusion to the premises.
Definition 8.3 : (Def. 2.4 of Dung et al. 2007.) Given a selection function f , a (backward) deduction of a conclusion α based on (or supported by) a set of premises P is a
sequence of multi-sets S1 , . . . , Sm , where S1 = {α}, Sm = P , and for every 1 ≤ i < m,
where σ is the sentence occurrence in Si selected by f :
(1) If σ is not in P then Si+1 = Si − {σ} ∪ S for some inference rule of the form
S → σ ∈ R.
(2) If σ is in P then Si+1 = Si .
Each Si is a step in the deduction.
Now an assumption-based argument is defined as follows.
Definition 8.4 : (Def. 2.6 of Dung et al. 2007.) An argument for a conclusion on the
basis of an ABF is a deduction of that conclusion whose premises are all assumptions (in
A).
As for notation, the existence of an argument for a conclusion α supported by a set of
assumptions A is denoted by A ⊢ α, or by A ⊢ABF α if it has to be distinguished from
the existence of a strict argument according to Definition 3.6 with the same premises and
conclusion; the latter will below be denoted by A ⊢AT α.
Finally, Dung et al.’s notion of argument attack is defined as follows.
Definition 8.5 : (Def. 2.7 of Dung et al. 2007.)
• An argument A ⊢ α attacks an argument B ⊢ β if and only if A ⊢ α attacks an

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

21

assumption in B ;
• an argument A ⊢ α attacks an assumption β if and only if α is the contrary β of β .
The argumentation theory corresponding to an assumption-based framework is now
defined as follows.
Definition 8.6 :
Given an assumption-based framework ABF
=
−
(LABF , RABF , A, ABF
), the corresponding argumentation theory ATABF = (AS , KB ),
′
where AS = (LAT , −
AT , RAT , ≤) and KB = (K, ≤ ), is defined as follows:
• LAT = LABF
• ϕ ∈ ψ AT iff ϕ = ψ ABF
• RAT = Rs = RABF
• Kn = Kp = Ki = ∅
• Ka = A
• ≤=≤′ == ∅

Note that ATABF is well-formed and all AT ABF arguments are strict and plausible.
The main task now is to prove that there is an ABF -argument for α from P if and only
if there is an AT ABF -argument for α with premises P . In fact, this can only be proven for
the special case of argumentation theories that do not allow for arguments with an infinite
number of subarguments. Technically the present framework allows for such arguments
even if they are noncircular. For example, an AT with Rs = {pi+1 → pi | i ≥ 1} allows
for an argument for p1 with an infinite number of subarguments (and an empty set of
premises). So far no proof has depended on finiteness of arguments. In an ABF , however,
arguments are by definition finite even if the set of inference rules allows for infinite ones,
as in the just-given example.
Proposition 8.7 : For all ABF such that AT = AT ABF does not allow arguments with
an infinite number of subarguments, there exists an argument A ⊢ABF α if and only if
there exists an argument A ⊢AT α.
From this it follows that
Proposition 8.8 : For all ABF such that AT = AT ABF does not allow arguments with
an infinite number of subarguments it holds for every argument A ⊢ABF α and every
argument A ⊢AT α that A ⊢ABF α is defeated by an argument B ⊢ABF β if and only if
A ⊢AT α is defeated by an argument B ⊢AT β .
Now the main correspondence result can be proven.
Theorem 8.9 :
set E :

For all ABF , any semantics S subsumed by complete semantics and any

(1) if E is an S -extension of ABF then EAT is an S -extension of AT , where EAT =
{A ⊢AT α | A ⊢ABF α ∈ E};
(2) if E is an S -extension of AT then EABF is an S -extension of ABF , where
EABF = {A ⊢ABF α | A ⊢AT α ∈ E}.
Theorem 8.9 in fact says that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the extensions of an ABF and those of its corresponding AT . From this it follows that:
Corollary 8.10 : For any ABF , any semantics S subsumed by complete semantics, and
for any formula ϕ it holds that ϕ is skeptically (credulously) S -acceptable in ABF if and
only if ϕ is skeptically (credulously) S -acceptable in AT ABF .

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

22

9.

Other related research

As was said above, the present framework is inspired by the work of Pollock (1987, 1994)
and Vreeswijk (1993, 1997). Essentially, it takes from both the idea that defeasible reasoning proceeds by chaining two kinds of inference rules into inference trees. The present
mathematical formulation of this idea is directly adopted from Vreeswijk (1993, 1997).
The present notions of undercutting and rebutting defeat are taken from Pollock’s work
and then generalised to arbitrary preference relations on arguments (Pollock only has a notion of probabilistic strength), and to logical languages with arbitrary contrary mappings.
They are then combined with a notion of undermining defeat.
In fact, the system of Pollock (1994) is not formalised in terms of arguments but in
terms of so-called ‘inference graphs’, in which nodes are connected either by inference
links (applications of inference rules) or by defeat links. The nodes are ‘lines of argument’, which are propositions plus an encoding of the argument lines from which they
are derived. So if a proposition is derived in more than one way, it occurs in more than
one line of argument. Such duplications cannot be avoided, since defeat relations depend
on the strength of a proposition, which in turn depends on the way in which it is derived.
Nodes are evaluated in terms of the recursive structure of the graph. Jakobovits and Vermeir (1999) proved that Pollock’s system can be given an equivalent formulation as an
instance of Dung’s abstract argumentation frameworks with preferred semantics.
With Vreeswijk’s framework the relation with Dung-style semantics is still an open
issue, since it models conflict not as a relation between two individual arguments but as a
property of sets of arguments: a set of arguments is said to be in conflict if there exists a
strict argument from their conclusions for ⊥. Vreeswijk then defines a notion of warrant
for arguments which resembles stable semantics.
Gordon et al. (2007) propose the Carneades framework ‘of argument and burden of
proof’. Carneades’ main structure is that of an argument graph, which, despite its name,
is similar to Pollock’s inference graphs. Statement nodes are linked to each other via argument nodes, which record the inferences from one or more nodes to another. This notion
of an argument does not have the recursive structure of Definition 3.6 but instead stands
for a single inference step. As explained in Section 3.1, the premises of an argument can
be of three types: presumptions (similar to the present issues), assumptions (similar to
the present ordinary premises) and exceptions (similar to contradictories of the present
assumptions). Carneades has no distinction between strict and defeasible inference rules
and, unlike Pollock, does not express conflicts as a special type of link between statement
nodes. Instead, inferences (i.e., arguments) can be either pro or con a statement. Because
of this, statements occur only once in the graph. Also, attack relations are thus expressed
either as arguments pro and con the same statement or as an argument pro an exceptiontype premise of another argument. Carneades thus allows for rebutting and undermining
but not for undercutting; instead, undercutters are simulated by arguments pro exceptions.
Carneades’ inference graphs are assumed to contain no cycles, which excludes the representation of mutual attack relations through exceptions.
In Carneades the evaluation of statements in an argument graph is, as with Pollock’s
inference graphs, defined in terms of the recursive structure of the graph. Statements are
acceptable if they satisfy their ‘proof standard’. The general framework abstracts from
their nature but Gordon et al. (2007) give several examples of proof standards. The proof
standards are at the heart of Carneades’ acceptability notion, just like the notions of defence and admissibility are at the heart of Dung-style semantics. None of the examples
given by Gordon et al. (2007) have a known relation with any existing Dung-style semantics or the present framework, which thus is an issue for future research. Here it is also
relevant that Carneades incorporates dialogical elements since it matters whether a statement is ‘stated’, ‘questioned’, ‘accepted’ or ‘rejected’. These statuses of a statement are

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

23

assumed to be provided by a dialogical context in which Carneades is embedded.
Verheij (2003) presents a “sentence-based” (as opposed to “argument-based”) logic for
defeasible reasoning, called DefLog. Verheij assumes a logical language with just two
connectives, a unary connective × which informally stands for ‘it is defeated that’ and
a binary connective ; for expressing defeasible conditionals. He then assumes a single
inference scheme for this language, namely, modus ponens for ;. A set of sentences T
is said to support a sentence ϕ if “ϕ is in T or follows from T by repeated application
of ;-modus ponens” (Verheij 2003, p. 327). It seems reasonable to formalise this as the
backward deductions of assumption-based argumentation or the strict arguments of the
present framework. Moreover, T is said to attack ϕ if T supports ×ϕ. Verheij then considers partitions (J, D) of sets of sentences ∆ which he calls dialectical interpretations
and which are such that J (the “justified” sentences) is conflict-free and attacks every
sentence in D (the “defeated” sentences).
As already suggested by Verheij, there is a close formal relation between DefLog and
assumption-based argumentation. Firstly, dialectical interpretations are easily proven to
be equivalent to stable labellings, which are known to be equivalent to stable semantics
(first proven by Verheij 1996; see also Caminada 2006, Jakobovits and Vermeir 1999).
Furthermore, DefLog theories can be mapped onto assumption-based frameworks by letting an ABF contrary mapping be ×ϕ = ϕ for any ϕ, by regarding any set of dialectically
interpreted sentences as the assumptions A of an ABF and by having ϕ, ϕ ; ψ → ψ ,
for any ϕ and ψ in DefLog’s language, as the set R of inference rules of the ABF . The
result is an assumption-based framework in the sense of Definition 8.2 with stable semantics. The correspondence results of Dung et al. (2007) with Bondarenko et al. (1997) then
also apply to the special case of a DefLog-style ABF so that by the above Theorem 8.9
DefLog is a special case of the present framework with only strict arguments and only
undermining defeat.
Several argumentation systems model deductive argumentation. Here arguments are
proofs according to some deductive logic with consistent premises taken from a possibly inconsistent knowledge base expressed in the language of the logic (usually taken to
be standard propositional or first-order logic). In Amgoud and Cayrol (2002), which is
based on propositional logic, the structure of arguments is left undefined, except that the
premises imply the conclusion according to propositional logic. Several notions of defeat
are then considered. One of them corresponds to the present undermining defeat, where
arguments are compared in terms of a partial preorder on the belief base from which their
premises are taken. Argument acceptability is defined according to grounded semantics.
This variant of Amgoud and Cayrol (2002) can be reconstructed as a special case of
the present framework as follows. Firstly, L is any propositional language closed under
classical negation, where ϕ = ψ if ϕ = ¬ψ or ψ = ¬ϕ. Then Rs consists of all valid
propositional inferences while Rd is empty. The knowledge base equals Kp . Finally, as
with Deflog, it seems reasonable to formalise arguments as the strict arguments of the
present framework, although the extra constraint must be added that such arguments have
classically consistent premises. This consistency constraint makes that not all results of
this paper hold without further qualification. It is easy to verify that Propositions 5.8, 6.1
and 6.2 still hold with this constraint (for Proposition 5.8 note that in this case S ⊢ ϕ
by definition implies that the strict argument that exists for ϕ has consistent premises).
However, the proofs of Theorems 6.9 and 6.10 do not apply to this case, for similar reasons
as explained above in Section 7 with Example 7.4. It remains to be investigated whether
these theorems can be proven for this case under alternative conditions.
Besnard and Hunter’s (2008) version of deductive argumentation is similar to that of
Amgoud and Cayrol (2002), except for a generalised notion of undermining: an argument
is undermined by any argument of which the conclusion negates the conjunction if its
premises. It remains to be seen whether this version of undermining can be reduced to the

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

24

present version.
Two other logics for defeasible reasoning with both (domain-specific) strict and defeasible inference rules are Defeasible Logic (DL), first proposed by Nute (1994), and
Defeasible Logic Programming (DeLP; e.g. Garcia and Simari 2004). In both systems the
logical language is restricted in logic-programming style. DL is not explicitly argumentbased but defines the notion of a proof tree, which interleaves support and attack. Governatori et al. (2004) investigate the relation with Dung-style semantics. One variant of DL
is proven to instantiate grounded semantics. In DeLP the only way to attack an argument
is on a (sub-)conclusion. DeLP’s notion of argument acceptability has no known relation
to any of the current argumentation semantics.
Prakken and Sartor (1997) presented an argument-based version of extended logic programming, designed as an instance of Dung’s abstract argumentation frameworks with
grounded semantics. Their system comes close to being a special case of the present
framework. It has (domain-specific) strict and defeasible inference rules and allows for
rebutting and undercutting defeat. Furthermore, its notion of an argument comes close to
a ‘deduction’ version of Definition 3.6, i.e., it represents a particular order in which an
argument can be constructed. A difference is that in Prakken and Sartor (1997) two parallel subarguments do not need to be completed with an inference from their conclusion, so
that, for example (in the present notation) p, p ⇒ q, r, r ⇒ s is an argument with conclusions q and s. In Prakken and Sartor (1997) this was convenient for modelling reasoning
about defeasible priorities in the system. A more substantial difference is that while the
present framework considers rebutting and undercutting attack on equal footing, Prakken
and Sartor (1997) give priority to undercutting attack, so that if A undercuts B while B
rebuts A, A strictly defeats B . It seems that the present results do not crucially rely on
this difference, but this should be further investigated.
A final difference with the present framework is that in Prakken and Sartor (1997) the
role of strict rules in defeat is different. As in the present framework, only defeasible
inferences can be attacked, but an argument A with conclusion ϕ rebuts an argument B
with conclusion ϕ′ if there exists sets of strict rules Sa and Sb and a formula ψ such that
(with present notation) Sa ∪ {ϕ} ⊢ ψ and Sb ∪ {ϕ′ } ⊢ ψ . The difference can be best
explained with Examples 3.18 and 6.20. The motivation behind the definition of Prakken
and Sartor (1997) was that intuitively the ‘real’ conflict is between the two defaults on
whether someone is a bachelor or married. This is captured by their definition of rebutting
attack, since A2 can be extended with A3 to contradict B2 ’s conclusion and vice versa.
Hence the rule priorities are applied to A2 and B2 . By contrast, in the present framework
these arguments do not rebut each other since their top rules are strict. Instead, we saw
that their conflict is decided indirectly, by comparing A3 with B2 and B3 with A2 . The
present treatment of such examples can be defended by saying that conflicts are recognised
only when they are made explicit in an argument’s conclusion, which seems to better
respect the general nature of argumentation as providing explicit grounds for conclusions.
It remains to be investigated whether this difference affects the present results on the
rationality postulates (note that, although Prakken and Sartor 1997 do not assume that the
strict rules are closed under transposition, this assumption can be easily added).
In one respect Prakken and Sartor (1997) go beyond the present framework, namely,
in making the preference relation on the set of defeasible inference rules defeasible and
derivable within the framework. In this respect the system is a forerunner of Modgil’s
(2009) extended argumentation frameworks.
10.

Conclusion

The main rhetorical aim of this paper has been to present the ASPIC framework as a
general abstract framework for rule-based argumentation. In previous publications on

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

25

the ASPIC framework its unifying potential was underexposed because of a focus on
domain-specific inference rules instead of on general inference patterns. Here it has been
argued that ASPIC, although it can be used as a specific logic at the same level of abstraction as systems like DeLP, DL and Prakken and Sartor (1997), can also be used
as an abstract framework for reasoning with general inference rules, including argument
schemes. Moreover, it has been shown that by including undermining attack and generalising negation to arbitrary contrary mappings, the ASPIC framework unifies rule- and
assumption-based approaches to argumentation. The latter claim has been backed by a
formal proof that assumption-based argumentation (Bondarenko et al. 1997, Dung et al.
2007) is a special case of the framework and by semi-formal explanations that the same
holds for Verheij’s (2003) DefLog and (to a large extent) Amgoud and Cayrol’s (2002)
version of deductive argumentation.
In addition, the following technical contributions have been made:
• a generalisation of the ASPIC framework to arbitrary relations of contrariness between
well-formed formulas;
• an extension of the ASPIC framework with preference information for resolving conflicts between arguments;
• an extension of the ASPIC framework with four types of premises and with undermining attack;
• proof that Caminada and Amgoud’s (2007) rationality postulates still hold for the thus
generalised and extended framework, and that they hold not only for systems closed
under transposition but also for systems closed under contraposition.

The framework can be further extended and investigated in several ways. Firstly, as indicated above in Section 3.3.2, several alternative ways to define the relation between the
three kinds of defeat are possible. It could be investigated to what extent such alternatives
affect the present results. The same holds for the use of preferences to resolve undercutting
attack (also discussed in Section 3.3.2), for the constraint that arguments have consistent
premises (cf. the discussion of deductive argumentation in Section 9) and for alternative
ways to define argument conflicts involving strict rules (cf. the discussion of Prakken and
Sartor 1997 in Section 9).
Finally, as touched upon at the end of Section 9, an important extension of the present
framework is making the preference relations that are used for resolving conflicts defeasible and derivable within the framework. This could be done along the lines of Prakken and
Sartor (1997), after which it should be investigated whether Modgil’s (2009) reconstruction of Prakken and Sartor (1997) as an instance of his extended argumentation frameworks can be adapted to the extended ASPIC framework.

Appendix: proofs

Proposition 5.8 Consider any argumentation theory with L closed under classical negation and − defined accordingly. Then if Rs consists of all valid propositional inferences
then Rs is closed under contraposition and transposition.
Proof : Note first that if Rs consists of all valid propositional inferences, then ⊢ satisfies
the deduction theorem, i.e., it satisfies
{p1 , . . . , pn } ⊢ q ⇔ ⊢ (p1 ∧ . . . pn ) ⊃ q

Now consider any rule p1 , . . . , pn → q . Then {p1 , . . . , pn } ⊢ q so by the deduction
theorem ⊢ (p1 ∧. . . pn ) ⊃ q . Then also (by propositional reasoning) ⊢ (¬q∧p2 ∧. . . pn ) ⊃
¬p1 . But then by the deduction theorem {¬q, p2 , . . . , pn } ⊢ ¬p1 so since Rs contains all

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

26

valid propositional inferences, Rs contains ¬q, p2 , . . . , pn → ¬p1 .



Proposition 6.1 Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework as defined in Definition 3.22 and E any of its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by complete
semantics. Then for all A ∈ E : if A′ ∈ Sub(A) then A′ ∈ E .
Proof : The proof is a trivial adaptation of the proof of Proposition 1 of Caminada and
Amgoud (2007), taking the possibility of undermining defeat into account.

Proposition 6.2. Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework corresponding to an
argumentation theory, and E any of its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by
complete semantics. Then {Conc(A)|A ∈ E} = ClRs ({Conc(A)|A ∈ E}).
Proof : Caminada and Amgoud’s proof of their Proposition 8 depends on Proposition 6.1,
which also holds for the present framework, and makes no assumptions on the use of
priorities. Therefore the proof also holds for the present version.

Theorem 6.9. Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework corresponding to a wellformed argumentation theory that is closed under contraposition or transposition and
has a reasonable argument ordering and a consistent ClRs (Kn ), and let E be any of
its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by complete semantics. Then the set
{Conc(A) | A ∈ E} is consistent.
Proof : Let E be a complete extension. Suppose that {Conc(A) | A ∈ E} is inconsistent.
This means that ∃A, B ∈ E, Conc(A) = Conc(B). Since E is a complete extension, E
is conflict-free. This means that A does not defeat B and B does not defeat A. It will be
shown that this leads to a contradiction.
First the following lemmas are proven.
Lemma 10.1 : Let A be an argument and B a plausible or defeasible argument in
an argumentation theory that is closed under contraposition or transposition such that
Conc(A) and Conc(B) are contradictories. Then A can be extended to an argument A+
that rebuts or undermines B .
Proof : Consider first systems closed under contraposition. By Corollary 6.6 it holds
that Conc(M (B)) ⊢ Conc(B) so with contraposition (which is assumed to hold) and
since Conc(A) and Conc(B) contradict each other we have for any Bi ∈ M (B) that
Conc(M (B) \ {Bi }) ∪ Conc(A) ⊢ −Conc(Bi ). Then clearly M (B) \ {Bi } and M (A)
are the maximal fallible subarguments of an argument A+ for −Conc(Bi ). Since by construction of M (B) either Bi is a non-axiom premise or ends with a defeasible inference,
A+ either undermines or rebuts Bi . But then A also undermines or rebuts B .
For systems closed under transposition the existence of arguments A+ and Bi is proven
by straightforward generalisation of Lemma 6 of Caminada and Amgoud (2007). Then
the proof can be completed as above.

Corollary 10.2 : If the argumentation theory has a reasonable argument ordering then
if B ≺ A, then A+ defeats B .
Proof : (Continuing the proof of Lemma 10.1) Since  is reasonable, there exist such a
Bi and A+ such that A+ 6≺ Bi . Then A+ defeats Bi so A+ defeats B .

Now for proving Theorem 6.9 the following cases must be distinguished.
(1) A ∈ Ki . Then A is not in any extension.
(2) A is an assumption. If A is a contradictory of Conc(B), then B defeats A. If
instead A is a contrary of Conc(B), then since the argumentation theory is wellformed, B is also an assumption so A defeats B . Contradiction.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

27

(3) A is firm and strict. If B is also firm and strict, then ClRs (Kn ) is inconsistent,
which contradicts the assumption that it is consistent. If B is plausible or defeasible, then A defeats B by condition (1) of Definition 3.10. Contradiction.
(4) A is plausible or defeasible. If B is firm and strict then this is case (3), since the
case that Conc(A) is a contrary of Conc(B) is then excluded by well-formedness
of the argumentation theory. If B ’s top rule is defeasible and Conc(A) is a contrary of Conc(B) then A defeats B , while if Conc(A) and Conc(B) contradict
each other, either A defeats B or B defeats A. If B ’s top rule is strict then by the
assumption that the argumentation theory is well-formed, Conc(A) and Conc(B)
contradict each other. If B 6≺ A then B defeats A while otherwise A can by
Lemma 10.1 and Corollary 10.2 be extended to an argument A+ that defeats B .
It is then left to prove that A+ ∈ E . Any defeater C of A+ will by construction of
A+ do so by defeating an element of M (A) or M (B) (since all inferences that are
not in M (A) or M (B) are strict and there are no new premises). However, this
defeated element is in E by Proposition 6.1, so since E is conflict-free, C 6∈ E .
But then A+ ∈ E , which contradicts the fact that E is conflict-free.


Theorem 6.10 Let <A, Def > be an argumentation framework corresponding to a wellformed argumentation theory that is closed under contraposition or transposition and
has a reasonable argument ordering and a consistent ClRs (Kn ), and let E be any of
its extensions under a given semantics subsumed by complete semantics. Then the set
ClRs ({Conc(A) | A ∈ E}) is consistent.
Proof : As in Caminada and Amgoud (2007).



Corollary 6.11 If the conditions of Theorem 6.10 are satisfied, then for any extension E
under a given semantics subsumed by complete semantics the set {ϕ | ϕ is a premise of
an argument in E} is consistent.
Proof : let A be any argument in E and ϕ any premise of A. By definition of an argument,
ϕ is a subargument of A so by Proposition 6.1 we have that ϕ ∈ E . Then the corollary
follows from Theorem 6.10 and the fact that subsets of consistent sets are consistent. 
Proposition 6.15 The last-link argument ordering is reasonable.
Proof :
Lemma 10.3 : Consider any ordering s on sets ordered by a partial preorder ≤e such
that S1 ≺s S2 iff there exists an e1 ∈ S1 such that for all e2 ∈ S2 it holds that e1 <e e2 .
Then if S1 ≺s S2 and e1 is a non-smallest element of S1 (w.r.t. ≤e ), then S2 ∪ {e1 } 6≺s S1 .
Proof : Straightforward.



Now by Corollary 6.13 that B ≺ A means that there exists a Bi ∈ M (B) with top rule
b such that for all A′ ∈ M (A) with top rule a it holds that b < a. Choose such a Bi with
minimal b (w.r.t. ≤e ) to form A+ as in the proof of Corollary 10.2. Then by Lemma 10.3
LastDefRules(A+ ) 6≺s LastDefRules(Bi ). But then A+ 6≺ Bi .

Proposition 6.18 The weakest-link argument ordering is reasonable.
Proof :
That B ≺ A now means that Prem(B) ≺s Prem(A) and DefRules(B) ≺s
DefRules(A).
If DefRules(B) 6= ∅ then there exists a Bi ∈ DefRules(B) with top rule b such that
for all A′ ∈ DefRules(A) with top rule a it holds that b < a. Choose such a Bi with
minimal b (w.r.t. ≤) in the construction of A+ and Bi in the proof of Corollary 10.2. Then

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

28

since all new defeasible rules of the corresponding A+ are from elements of M (B), by
Lemma 10.3 DefRules(A+ ) 6≺s DefRules(B). But then A+ 6≺ Bi .
If DefRules(B) = ∅ then DefRules(A) = ∅. Since Prem(B) ≺s Prem(A) there exists
a premise p in Prem(B) such that for all premises p′ in Prem(A) it holds that p′ < p .
Then in the construction of A+ and Bi in the proof of Corollary 10.2, choose Bi to be an
argument containing a minimal such p. Then since all new premises of the corresponding
A+ are from Prem(B), by Lemma 10.3 Prem(A+ ) 6≺s Prem(B). But then A+ 6≺ Bi . 
Proposition 8.7 For all ABF such that AT = AT ABF does not allow arguments with an
infinite number of subarguments, there exists an argument A ⊢ABF α if and only if there
exists an argument A ⊢AT α.
Proof :
⇒ For the only-if part, let S1 , . . . , Sn be a backward deduction of α. It will be shown
by induction on the structure of backward deductions that there exists an AT -argument
with conclusion α and premises Sn .
Note first that since all elements of Sn are in A so in Ka , by clause (1) of Definition 3.6
they are all an AT -argument and their premises are all in Sn .
Consider next any set Si such that all elements of Si+1 are the conclusion of an AT argument with premises from Sn . Then for any element αi of Si , if αi is also in Si+1 ,
then trivially αi is the conclusion of an AT -argument with premises in Sn , otherwise for
some set S = {β1 , . . . , βm } ⊆ Si+1 there exists a rule β1 , . . . , βm → αi in RABF . But
then this rule is also in Rs . Let, furthermore, the AT -arguments for β1 , . . . , βm (which
exist by the induction hypothesis) be B1 , . . . , Bm : then by clause (2) of Definition 3.6,
B1 , . . . , Bm → αi is an AT -argument for αi with all its premises in Sn .
Next it is proven that for any Si the union of all premises of all AT -arguments
for elements in Si is Sn . Note that for any pair Si , Si+1 , the set Si+1 is formed by
replacing at most one element σ in Si with a set S in Si+1 . As just proven, there exists
an AT -argument B1 , . . . , Bm → αi , where B1 , . . . , Bm are the AT -arguments for all
elements in S . By clause (2) of Definition 3.6 the premises of this argument are the union
of the premises of the arguments B1 , . . . , Bn . But then no premises have been added
or deleted by creating Si+1 from Si . Note finally, that the union of the premises of all
AT -arguments for any element in Sn (which are these elements themselves) trivially
equals Sn . But then this set equals Sn for all Si .
⇐ For the if-part, suppose P ⊢AT α. A backward deduction with multisets S1 , . . . , Sn
such that S1 = {α} and Sn = P can be created as a maximal sequence such that:

(1) S1 = {α},
(2) For all Si (i ≥ 1): create Si+1 by selecting one element σ from Si not selected
before and:
a) if σ ∈ P then Si+1 = Si ; otherwise
b) Si+1 = Si − {σ} ∪ S for some S = {Conc(B1 ), . . . , Conc(Bn )} such that
there exists an argument B ∈ Sub(A) of the form B1 , . . . , Bn → σ .
It is now proven that for any Si and any σ ∈ Si one of these two conditions is satisfied,
i.e., either σ ∈ P or σ is the conclusion of an argument in Sub(A). The proof is with
induction on the structure of S1 , . . . , Sn . Consider first S1 = {α}. Then if A = α ∈
Ka , then trivially α ∈ P , otherwise A = A1 , . . . , An → α so trivially A ∈ sub(A).
Consider next any Si such that all its elements satisfy conditions (2)a and (2)b. Then if
Si+1 = Si this trivially also holds for Si+1 , otherwise if S replaces σ in Si+1 then by
the induction hypothesis this is since there exists a subargument B ∈ Sub(A) of the form
B1 , . . . , Bn → σ such that S = {Conc(B1 ), . . . , Conc(Bn )}. Then clearly for any new
element Conc(Bi ) ∈ S there exists a subargument for it in Sub(A), namely, Bi .

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

29

Next, since all steps in the sequence apply an inference rule from Rs , which by Definition 8.6 is also in RABF , the sequence clearly is a backward deduction.
Finally it is proven that the sequence ends with Sn = P . Let Sub∗ (A) be the multiset consisting of, for all A′ ∈ Sub(A) , as many occurrences as there are inferences
in A that use A′ . Note that by the assumption that Sub(A) is finite, Sub∗ (A) is also
finite. Then let for any Si the set UnusedSub(Si ) be the subset of all arguments in
Sub∗ (A) that were not used to create Si from S1 . (So UnusedSub(S1 ) = Sub∗ (A) and
e.g. UnusedSub(S2 ) = Sub∗ (A) − {A}). Then note that by any application of condition (2)b this multiset loses one element. Then since S1 , . . . , Sn is a maximal sequence
of elements satisfying conditions (1) and (2), we have that UnusedSub(Sn ) = ∅. Then
since P ⊆ Sub∗ (A), we have that P ⊆ Sn . Assume next for contradiction that there is
an element σ ∈ Sn which is not in P : then, as proven above, σ can be replaced by a set
S such that S → σ is an inference in A, so S1 , . . . , Sn is not maximal. Contradiction, so
Sn = P .

Proposition 8.8 For all ABF such that AT = AT ABF does not allow arguments with
an infinite number of subarguments it holds for every argument A ⊢ABF α and every
argument A ⊢AT α that A ⊢ABF α is defeated by an argument B ⊢ABF β if and only if
A ⊢AT α is defeated by an argument B ⊢AT β .
Proof : ⇒ Assume A ⊢ABF α and B ⊢ABF β defeats A ⊢ABF α. Then according to
the contrariness mapping in ABF we have that β = p for some p ∈ A. Furthermore, by
Proposition 8.7 there exists an A ⊢AT α and an argument B ⊢AT β . Then by identity
of the contrariness mappings we also have that β = p for some p ∈ A according to AT .
Then since p ∈ Ka , clearly B ⊢AT β defeats A ⊢AT α.
⇐ Assume A ⊢AT α and B ⊢AT β defeats A ⊢AT α. Then since all arguments in AT
are strict, B undermines A and according to the contrariness mapping in AT we have that
β = p for some p ∈ A. Furthermore, by Proposition 8.7 there exists an A ⊢ABF α and
an argument B ⊢ABF β . Then by identity of the contrariness mappings we also have that
β = p for some p ∈ A according to ABF . Then since p ∈ A, clearly B ⊢ABF β defeats
A ⊢ABF α.

Theorem 8.9 For all ABF , any semantics S subsumed by complete semantics and any
set E :
(1) if E is an S -extension of ABF then EAT is an S -extension of AT , where EAT =
{A ⊢AT α | A ⊢ABF α ∈ E};
(2) if E is an S -extension of AT then EABF is an S -extension of ABF , where
EABF = {A ⊢ABF α | A ⊢AT α ∈ E}.
Proof : As before, the proof for complete semantics suffices.
(1) Consider any complete extension E of ABF . It is first proven that any member
of EAT is defended by EAT . Since E is conflict-free, by construction of EAT and
Proposition 8.8 also EAT is conflict-free. Consider next any A ⊢AT α ∈ EAT
defeated by some B ⊢AT β . By construction of EAT , there exists an A ⊢ABF
α ∈ E . Then by Propositions 8.7 and 8.8 there exists a B ⊢ABF β defeating
A ⊢ABF α. But since E is a complete extension, B ⊢ABF β is in turn defeated
by some C ⊢ABF γ ∈ E . Then by construction of EAT and Proposition 8.7,
also C ⊢AT γ ∈ EAT and by Proposition 8.8, C ⊢AT γ defeats B ⊢AT β . So
A ⊢AT α is defended by EAT .
Next, to prove that any argument defended by EAT is a member of EAT , assume A ⊢AT α is defended by EAT . Then any of its defeaters B ⊢AT β is in turn
defeated by an element C ⊢AT γ ∈ EAT . But then by Proposition 8.8 the same
holds for their corresponding ABF -arguments, which exist by Proposition 8.7.
Moreover, by construction of EAT we have that C ⊢ABF γ ∈ E so, since E

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

30

aspicAF

REFERENCES

is a complete extension, also A ⊢ABF α ∈ E . But then A ⊢AT α ∈ EAT by
construction of EAT and Proposition 8.7.
(2) The proof of (2) is entirely similar and therefore omitted.


Corollary 8.10 For any ABF , any semantics S subsumed by complete semantics, and for
any formula ϕ it holds that ϕ is skeptically (credulously) S -acceptable in ABF if and
only if ϕ is skeptically (credulously) S -acceptable in AT ABF .
Proof : Straightforward.



References
Amgoud, L., Bodenstaff, L., Caminada, M., McBurney, P., Parsons, S., Prakken, H., van Veenen, J., and Vreeswijk, G.
(2006), “Final review and report on formal argumentation system,” Deliverable D2.6, ASPIC IST-FP6-002307.
Amgoud, L., and Cayrol, C. (2002), “A model of reasoning based on the production of acceptable arguments,” Annals of
Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, 34, 197–216.
Baroni, P., and Giacomin, M. (2009), “Semantics of abstract argument systems,” in Argumentation in Artificial Intelligence
eds. I. Rahwan and G. Simari, Berlin: Springer, pp. 25–44.
Bench-Capon, T. (2003), “Persuasion in practical argument using value-based argumentation frameworks,” Journal of Logic
and Computation, 13, 429–448.
Besnard, P., and Hunter, A., Elements of Argumentation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press (2008).
Bex, F., Prakken, H., Reed, C., and Walton, D. (2003), “Towards a formal account of reasoning about evidence: argumentation schemes and generalisations,” Artificial Intelligence and Law, 12, 125–165.
Bondarenko, A., Dung, P., Kowalski, R., and Toni, F. (1997), “An abstract, argumentation-theoretic approach to default
reasoning,” Artificial Intelligence, 93, 63–101.
Caminada, M. (2006), “On the issue of reinstatement in argumentation,” in Proceedings of the 11th European Conference
on Logics in Artificial Intelligence (JELIA 2006), no. 4160 in Springer Lecture Notes in AI, Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp.
111–123.
Caminada, M., and Amgoud, L. (2007), “On the evaluation of argumentation formalisms,” Artificial Intelligence, 171,
286–310.
Dung, P. (1995), “On the acceptability of arguments and its fundamental role in nonmonotonic reasoning, logic programming, and n–person games,” Artificial Intelligence, 77, 321–357.
Dung, P., Kowalski, R., and Toni, F. (2006), “Dialectic proof procedures for assumption-based, admissible argumentation,”
Artificial Intelligence, 170, 114–159.
Dung, P., Mancarella, P., and Toni, F. (2007), “Computing ideal sceptical argumentation,” Artificial Intelligence, 171, 642–
674.
Elvang-Göransson, M., Fox, J., and Krause, P. (1993), “Acceptability of arguments as logical uncertainty,” in Proceedings of
the 2nd European Conference on Symbolic and Quantitative Approaches to Reasoning with Uncertainty (ECSQARU93),
Berlin: Springer Verlag, pp. 85–90.
Garcia, A., and Simari, G. (2004), “Defeasible Logic Programming: An Argumentative Approach,” Theory and Practice of
Logic Programming, 4, 95–138.
Gordon, T., Prakken, H., and Walton, D. (2007), “The Carneades model of argument and burden of proof,” Artificial Intelligence, 171, 875–896.
Governatori, G., Maher, M., Antoniou, G., and Billington, D. (2004), “Argumentation semantics for defeasible logic,”
Journal of Logic and Computation, 14, 675–702.
Jakobovits, H., and Vermeir, D. (1999), “Robust semantics for argumentation frameworks,” Journal of Logic and Computation, 9, 215–261.
Lin, F., and Shoham, Y. (1989), “Argument systems. A uniform basis for nonmonotonic reasoning,” in Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning: Proceedings of the First International Conference, San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, pp. 245–255.
Loui, R. (1987), “Defeat among arguments: a system of defeasible inference,” Computational Intelligence, 2, 100–106.
Modgil, S. (2009), “Reasoning about preferences in argumentation frameworks,” Artificial Intelligence, 173, 901–934.
Nute, D. (1994), “Defeasible logic,” in Handbook of Logic in Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming eds. D. Gabbay,
C. Hogger and J. Robinson, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 253–395.
Pollock, J., Knowledge and Justification, Princeton: Princeton University Press (1974).
Pollock, J. (1987), “Defeasible reasoning,” Cognitive Science, 11, 481–518.
Pollock, J. (1994), “Justification and Defeat,” Artificial Intelligence, 67, 377–408.
Prakken, H., Logical Tools for Modelling Legal Argument. A Study of Defeasible Argumentation in Law, Law and Philosophy Library, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers (1997).
Prakken, H., and Sartor, G. (1997), “Argument-based extended logic programming with defeasible priorities,” Journal of
Applied Non-classical Logics, 7, 25–75.
Prakken, H., and Vreeswijk, G. (2002), “Logics for defeasible argumentation,” in Handbook of Philosophical Logic (Vol. 4,
Second ed.), eds. D. Gabbay and F. Günthner, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 219–318.
Reiter, R. (1980), “A logic for default reasoning,” Artificial Intelligence, 13, 81–132.
Verheij, B. (1996), “Two approaches to dialectical argumentation: admissible sets and argumentation stages,” in Proceedings of the Eighth Dutch Conference on Artificial Intelligence (NAIC-96), Utrecht, The Netherlands, pp. 357–368.
Verheij, B. (2003), “DefLog: on the logical interpretation of prima facie justified assumptions,” Journal of Logic and
Computation, 13, 319–346.

May 17, 2010

16:22

Argument & Computation

aspicAF

REFERENCES

31

Verheij, B. (2003), “Dialectical argumentation with argumentation schemes: an approach to legal logic,” Artificial Intelligence and Law, 11, 167–195.
Vreeswijk, G., Studies in Defeasible Argumentation, Doctoral dissertation Free University Amsterdam (1993).
Vreeswijk, G. (1997), “Abstract argumentation systems,” Artificial Intelligence, 90, 225–279.
Walton, D., Reed, C., and Macagno, F., Argumentation Schemes, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2008).

