A Gentle Introduction to Conformal Prediction and
Distribution-Free Uncertainty Quantification
Anastasios N. Angelopoulos and Stephen Bates

arXiv:2107.07511v6 [cs.LG] 7 Dec 2022

December 8, 2022
Abstract
Black-box machine learning models are now routinely used in high-risk settings, like medical diagnostics, which demand uncertainty quantification to avoid consequential model failures. Conformal prediction (a.k.a. conformal inference) is a user-friendly paradigm for creating statistically rigorous uncertainty
sets/intervals for the predictions of such models. Critically, the sets are valid in a distribution-free sense:
they possess explicit, non-asymptotic guarantees even without distributional assumptions or model assumptions. One can use conformal prediction with any pre-trained model, such as a neural network, to
produce sets that are guaranteed to contain the ground truth with a user-specified probability, such as
90%. It is easy-to-understand, easy-to-use, and general, applying naturally to problems arising in the
fields of computer vision, natural language processing, deep reinforcement learning, and so on.
This hands-on introduction is aimed to provide the reader a working understanding of conformal
prediction and related distribution-free uncertainty quantification techniques with one self-contained
document. We lead the reader through practical theory for and examples of conformal prediction and
describe its extensions to complex machine learning tasks involving structured outputs, distribution
shift, time-series, outliers, models that abstain, and more. Throughout, there are many explanatory
illustrations, examples, and code samples in Python. With each code sample comes a Jupyter notebook
implementing the method on a real-data example; the notebooks can be accessed and easily run by
clicking on the following icons:
.

1

Contents
1 Conformal Prediction
1.1

4

Instructions for Conformal Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2 Examples of Conformal Procedures

5
6

2.1

Classification with Adaptive Prediction Sets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

2.2

Conformalized Quantile Regression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

2.3

Conformalizing Scalar Uncertainty Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

2.3.1

The Estimated Standard Deviation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

2.3.2

Other 1-D Uncertainty Estimates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

Conformalizing Bayes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

2.4

3 Evaluating Conformal Prediction

11

3.1

Evaluating Adaptivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

3.2

The Effect of the Size of the Calibration Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

14

3.3

Checking for Correct Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

15

4 Extensions of Conformal Prediction

16

4.1

Group-Balanced Conformal Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

16

4.2

Class-Conditional Conformal Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

4.3

Conformal Risk Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

4.4

Outlier Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

4.5

Conformal Prediction Under Covariate Shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

4.6

Conformal Prediction Under Distribution Drift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

5 Worked Examples

23

5.1

Multilabel Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

5.2

Tumor Segmentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

5.3

Weather Prediction with Time-Series Distribution Shift . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

5.4

Toxic Online Comment Identification via Outlier Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

5.5

Selective Classification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

6 Full conformal prediction

27

6.1

Full Conformal Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

27

6.2

Cross-Conformal Prediction, CV+, and Jackknife+ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

28

7 Historical Notes on Conformal Prediction

28

A Distribution-Free Control of General Risks

39

A.1 Instructions for Learn then Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

40

A.1.1 Crash Course on Generating p-values

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

43

A.1.2 Crash Course on Familywise-Error Rate Algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

B Examples of Distribution-Free Risk Control

45

B.1 Multi-label Classification with FDR Control . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

46

B.2 Simultaneous Guarantees on OOD Detection and Coverage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

46

C Concentration Properties of the Empirical Coverage

49

D Theorem and Proof: Coverage Property of Conformal Prediction

50

3

Figure 1: Prediction set examples on Imagenet. We show three progressively more difficult examples
of the class fox squirrel and the prediction sets (i.e., C(Xtest )) generated by conformal prediction.

1

Conformal Prediction

Conformal prediction [1–3] (a.k.a. conformal inference) is a straightforward way to generate prediction sets
for any model. We will introduce it with a short, pragmatic image classification example, and follow up in
later paragraphs with a general explanation. The high-level outline of conformal prediction is as follows.
First, we begin with a fitted predicted model (such as a neural network classifier) which we will call fˆ. Then,
we will create prediction sets (a set of possible labels) for this classifier using a small amount of additional
calibration data—we will sometimes call this the calibration step.
Formally, suppose we have images as input and they each contain one of K classes. We begin with
a classifier that outputs estimated probabilities (softmax scores) for each class: fˆ(x) ∈ [0, 1]K . Then, we
reserve a moderate number (e.g., 500) of fresh i.i.d. pairs of images and classes unseen during training,
(X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ), for use as calibration data. Using fˆ and the calibration data, we seek to construct a
prediction set of possible labels C(Xtest ) ⊂ {1, . . . , K} that is valid in the following sense:
1 − α ≤ P(Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )) ≤ 1 − α +

1
,
n+1

(1)

where (Xtest , Ytest ) is a fresh test point from the same distribution, and α ∈ [0, 1] is a user-chosen error rate.
In words, the probability that the prediction set contains the correct label is almost exactly 1 − α; we call
this property marginal coverage, since the probability is marginal (averaged) over the randomness in the
calibration and test points. See Figure 1 for examples of prediction sets on the Imagenet dataset.
To construct C from fˆ and the calibration data, we will perform a simple calibration step that requires
only a few lines of code; see the right panel of Figure 2. We now describe the calibration step in more detail,
introducing some terms that will be helpful later on. First, we set the conformal score si = 1 − fˆ(Xi )Yi to be
one minus the softmax output of the true class. The score is high when the softmax output of the true class
is low, i.e., when the model is badly wrong. Next comes the critical step: define q̂ to be the d(n+1)(1−α)e/n
empirical quantile of s1 , ..., sn , where d·e is the ceiling function (q̂ is essentially the 1 − α quantile, but with
a small correction). Finally, for a new test data point (where Xtest is known but Ytest is not), create a
prediction set C(Xtest ) = {y : fˆ(Xtest )y ≥ 1 − q̂} that includes all classes with a high enough softmax output
(see Figure 2). Remarkably, this algorithm gives prediction sets that are guaranteed to satisfy (1), no matter
what (possibly incorrect) model is used or what the (unknown) distribution of the data is.

class

softmax output

#

true class

softmax output

(1) compute scores (2) get quantile (3) construct
prediction set
on holdout data

scores,

class

# 1: get conformal scores. n = calib_Y.shape[0]
cal_smx = model(calib_X).softmax(dim=1).numpy()
cal_scores = 1-cal_smx[np.arange(n),cal_labels]
# 2: get adjusted quantile
q_level = np.ceil((n+1)*(1-alpha))/n
qhat = np.quantile(cal_scores, q_level, method='higher')
val_smx = model(val_X).softmax(dim=1).numpy()
prediction_sets = val_smx >= (1-qhat) # 3: form prediction sets

Figure 2: Illustration of conformal prediction with matching Python code.

4

Remarks
Let us think about the interpretation of C. The function C is set-valued —it takes in an image, and it
outputs a set of classes as in Figure 1. The model’s softmax outputs help to generate the set. This method
constructs a different output set adaptively to each particular input. The sets become larger when the model
is uncertain or the image is intrinsically hard. This is a property we want, because the size of the set gives you
an indicator of the model’s certainty. Furthermore, C(Xtest ) can be interpreted as a set of plausible classes
that the image Xtest could be assigned to. Finally, C is valid, meaning it satisfies (1).1 These properties of
C translate naturally to other machine learning problems, like regression, as we will see.
With an eye towards generalization, let us review in detail what happened in our classification problem.
To begin, we were handed a model that had an inbuilt, but heuristic, notion of uncertainty: softmax outputs.
The softmax outputs attempted to measure the conditional probability of each class; in other words, the
jth entry of the softmax vector estimated P(Y = j | X = x), the probability of class j conditionally on
an input image x. However, we had no guarantee that the softmax outputs were any good; they may have
been arbitrarily overfit or otherwise untrustworthy. Therefore, instead of taking the softmax outputs at face
value, we used the holdout set to adjust for their deficiencies.
The holdout set contained n ≈ 500 fresh data points that the model never saw during training, which
allowed us to get an honest appraisal of its performance. The adjustment involved computing conformal
scores, which grow when the model is uncertain, but are not valid prediction intervals on their own. In our
case, the conformal score was one minus the softmax output of the true class, but in general, the score can
be any function of x and y. We then took q̂ to be roughly the 1 − α quantile of the scores. In this case, the
quantile had a simple interpretation—when setting α = 0.1, at least 90% of ground truth softmax outputs
are guaranteed to be above the level 1 − q̂ (we prove this rigorously in Appendix D). Taking advantage of
this fact, at test-time, we got the softmax outputs of a new image Xtest and collected all classes with outputs
above 1 − q̂ into a prediction set C(Xtest ). Since the softmax output of the new true class Ytest is guaranteed
to be above 1 − q̂ with probability at least 90%, we finally got the guarantee in Eq. (1).

1.1

Instructions for Conformal Prediction

As we said during the summary, conformal prediction is not specific to softmax outputs or classification
problems. In fact, conformal prediction can be seen as a method for taking any heuristic notion of
uncertainty from any model and converting it to a rigorous one (see the diagram below). Conformal prediction does not care if the underlying prediction problem is discrete/continuous or classification/regression.
Heuristic
uncertainty
(per input)

conformal
prediction

Rigorous
uncertainty
(per input)

We next outline conformal prediction for a general input x and output y (not necessarily discrete).
1. Identify a heuristic notion of uncertainty using the pre-trained model.
2. Define the score function s(x, y) ∈ R. (Larger scores encode worse agreement between x and y.)
3. Compute q̂ as the d(n+1)(1−α)e
quantile of the calibration scores s1 = s(X1 , Y1 ), ..., sn = s(Xn , Yn ).
n
4. Use this quantile to form the prediction sets for new examples:
C(Xtest ) = {y : s(Xtest , y) ≤ q̂} .

(2)

As before, these sets satisfy the validity property in (1), for any (possibly uninformative) score function and
(possibly unknown) distribution of the data. We formally state the coverage guarantee next.
1 Due to the discreteness of Y , a small modification involving tie-breaking is needed to additionally satisfy the upper bound

(see [4] for details; this randomization is usually ignored in practice). We will henceforth ignore such tie-breaking.

5

Theorem 1 (Conformal coverage guarantee; Vovk, Gammerman, and Saunders [5]). Suppose (Xi , Yi )i=1,...,n
and (Xtest , Ytest ) are i.i.d. and define q̂ as in step 3 above and C(Xtest ) as in step 4 above. Then the following
holds:


P Ytest ∈ C(Xtest ) ≥ 1 − α.
See Appendix D for a proof and a statement that includes the upper bound in (1). We note that the
above is only a special case of conformal prediction, called split conformal prediction. This is the most
widely-used version of conformal prediction, and it will be our primary focus. To complete the picture, we
describe conformal prediction in full generality later in Section 6 and give an overview of the literature in
Section 7.
Choice of score function
Upon first glance, this seems too good to be true, and a skeptical reader might ask the following question:
How is it possible to construct a statistically valid prediction set even if the heuristic notion of uncertainty
of the underlying model is arbitrarily bad?
Let’s give some intuition to supplement the mathematical understanding from the proof in Appendix D.
Roughly, if the scores si correctly rank the inputs from lowest to highest magnitude of model error, then the
resulting sets will be smaller for easy inputs and bigger for hard ones. If the scores are bad, in the sense that
they do not approximate this ranking, then the sets will be useless. For example, if the scores are random
noise, then the sets will contain a random sample of the label space, where that random sample is large
enough to provide valid marginal coverage. This illustrates an important underlying fact about conformal
prediction: although the guarantee always holds, the usefulness of the prediction sets is primarily
determined by the score function. This should be no surprise—the score function incorporates almost all
the information we know about our problem and data, including the underlying model itself. For example, the
main difference between applying conformal prediction on classification problems versus regression problems
is the choice of score. There are also many possible score functions for a single underlying model, which have
different properties. Therefore, constructing the right score function is an important engineering choice. We
will next show a few examples of good score functions.

2

Examples of Conformal Procedures

In this section we give examples of conformal prediction applied in many settings, with the goal of providing
the reader a bank of techniques to practically deploy. Note that we will focus only on one-dimensional Y in
this section, and smaller conformal scores will correspond to more model confidence (such scores are called
nonconformity scores). Richer settings, such as high-dimensional Y , complicated (or multiple) notions of
error, or where different mistakes cost different amounts, often require the language of risk control, outlined
in Section A.

2.1

Classification with Adaptive Prediction Sets

Let’s begin our sequence of examples with an improvement to the classification example in Section 1.
The previous method produces prediction sets with the smallest average size [6], but it tends to undercover
hard subgroups and overcover easy ones. Here we develop a different method called adaptive prediction sets
(APS) that avoids this problem. We will follow [7] and [4].
As motivation for this new procedure, note that if the softmax outputs fˆ(Xtest ) were a perfect model
of Ytest |Xtest , we would greedily include the top-scoring classes until their total mass just exceeded 1 − α.

6

# Get scores. calib_X.shape[0] == calib_Y.shape[0] == n
cal_pi = cal_smx.argsort(1)[:,::-1]; cal_srt = np.take_along_axis(cal_smx,cal_pi,axis=1).cumsum(axis=1)
cal_scores = np.take_along_axis(cal_srt,cal_pi.argsort(axis=1),axis=1)[range(n),cal_labels]
# Get the score quantile
qhat = np.quantile(cal_scores, np.ceil((n+1)*(1-alpha))/n, interpolation='higher')
# Deploy (output=list of length n, each element is tensor of classes)
val_pi = val_smx.argsort(1)[:,::-1]; val_srt = np.take_along_axis(val_smx,val_pi,axis=1).cumsum(axis=1)
prediction_sets = np.take_along_axis(val_srt <= qhat,val_pi.argsort(axis=1),axis=1)

Figure 3: Python code for adaptive prediction sets.

Formally, we can describe this oracle algorithm as
{π1 (x), ..., πk (x)} , where k = sup




0

k0 :



k
X

fˆ(Xtest )πj (x) < 1 − α




+ 1,



j=1

and π(x) is the permutation of {1, ..., K} that sorts fˆ(Xtest ) from most likely to least likely. In practice,
however, this procedure fails to provide coverage, since fˆ(Xtest ) is not perfect; it only provides us a heuristic
notion of uncertainty. Therefore, we will use conformal prediction to turn this into a rigorous notion of
uncertainty.
To proceed, we define a score function inspired by the oracle algorithm:
s(x, y) =

k
X

fˆ(x)πj (x) , where y = πk (x).

j=1

In other words, we greedily include classes in our set until we reach the true label, then we stop. Unlike the
score from Section 1, this one utilizes the softmax outputs of all classes, not just the true class.
). Having
The next step, as in all conformal procedures, is to set q̂ = Quantile(s1 , ..., sn ; d(n+1)(1−α)e
n
done so, we will form the prediction set {y : s(x, y) ≤ q̂}, modified slightly to avoid zero-size sets:


k0


X
C(x) = {π1 (x), ..., πk (x)} , where k = sup k 0 :
fˆ(x)πj (x) < q̂ + 1.
(3)


j=1

cumulative
softmax
output

{

fox

fox

sq
u
gra irrel
y
bu fox
rai cke
nb t
a
ma rrel
rm
po ot
lec
we at
as
el

sq
u
gra irrel
y
b fox
rai ucke
nb t
a
ma rrel
rm
po ot
lec
we at
as
el

softmax
output

Figure 3 shows Python code to implement this method. As usual, these uncertainty sets (with tie-breaking)
satisfy (1). See [4] for details and significant practical improvements, which we implemented here:
.

prediction set

Figure 4: A visualization of the adaptive prediction sets algorithm in Eq. (3). Classes are included
from most to least likely until their cumulative softmax output exceeds the quantile.

7

# Get scores
cal_scores = np.maximum(cal_labels-model_upper(cal_X), model_lower(cal_X)-cal_labels)
# Get the score quantile
qhat = np.quantile(cal_scores, np.ceil((n+1)*(1-alpha))/n, interpolation='higher')
# Deploy (output=lower and upper adjusted quantiles)
prediction_sets = [val_lower - qhat, val_upper + qhat]

Figure 5: Python code for conformalized quantile regression.

2.2

Conformalized Quantile Regression

We will next show how to incorporate uncertainty into regression problems with a continuous output, following the algorithm in [8]. We use quantile regression [9] as our base model. As a reminder, the quantile
regression algorithm attempts to learn the γ quantile of Ytest |Xtest = x for each possible value of x. We will
call the true quantile tγ (x) and the fitted model t̂γ (x). Since by definition Ytest |Xtest = x lands
 below t0.05 (x)
with 5% probability and above t0.95 (x) with 5% probability, we would expect the interval t̂0.05 (x), t̂0.95 (x)
to have approximately 90% coverage. However, because the fitted quantiles may be inaccurate, we will
conformalize them. Python pseudocode for conformalized quantile regression is in Figure 5.
After training an algorithm to output two such quantiles (this can be done with a standard loss function,
see below), tα/2 and t1−α/2 , we can define the score to be the difference between y and its nearest quantile,

s(x, y) = max t̂α/2 (x) − y, y − t̂1−α/2 (x) .
After computing the scores on our calibration set and setting q̂ = Quantile(s1 , ..., sn ; d(n+1)(1−α)e
), we can
n
form valid prediction intervals by taking


C(x) = t̂α/2 (x) − q̂, t̂1−α/2 (x) + q̂ .
(4)

n

t
se
prediction ion
s
tile regres

qu

a

Intuitively, the set C(x) just grows or shrinks the distance between the quantiles by q̂ to achieve coverage.

Figure 6: A visualization of the conformalized quantile regrssion algorithm in Eq. (4). We adjust
the quantiles by the constant q̂, picked during the calibration step.
As before, C satisfies the coverage property in Eq. (1). However, unlike our previous example in Section 1,
C is no longer a set of classes, but instead a continuous interval in R. Quantile regression is not the only
way to get such continuous-valued intervals. However, it is often the best way, especially if α is known in
advance. The reason is that the intervals generated via quantile regression even without conformal prediction,
i.e. [t̂α/2 (x), t̂1−α/2 (x)], have good coverage to begin with. Furthermore, they have asymptotically valid
conditional coverage (a concept we will explain in Section 3). These properties propagate through the
conformal procedure and lead to prediction sets with good performance.
One attractive feature of quantile regression is that it can easily be added on top of any base model
simply by changing the loss function to a quantile loss (informally referred to as a pinball loss),



Lγ (t̂γ , y) = (y − t̂γ )γ 1 y > t̂γ + (t̂γ − y)(1 − γ)1 y ≤ t̂γ .

8

The reader can think of quantile regression as a generalization of L1-norm regression: when γ = 0.5, the loss
function reduces to L0.5 = |t̂γ (x) − y|/2, which encourages t̂0.5 (x) to converge to the conditional median.
Changing γ just modifies the L1 norm as in the illustration above to target other quantiles. In practice, one
can just use a quantile loss instead of MSE at the end of any algorithm, like a neural network, in order to
regress to a quantile.

2.3

Conformalizing Scalar Uncertainty Estimates

2.3.1

The Estimated Standard Deviation

As an alternative to quantile regression, our next example is a different way of constructing prediction sets for
continuous y with a less rich but more common notion of heuristic uncertainty: an estimate of the standard
deviation σ̂(x). For example, one can produce uncertainty scalars by assuming Ytest | Xtest = x follows some
parametric distribution—like a Gaussian distribution—and training a model to output the mean and variance
of that distribution. To be precise, in this setting we choose to model Ytest | Xtest = x ∼ N (µ(x), σ(x)), and
ˆ
we have
p models f (x) and σ̂(x) trained to maximize the likelihood of the data with respect to E [Ytest | Xtest=x ]
and Var [Ytest | Xtest = x] respectively. Then, fˆ(x) gets used as the point prediction and σ̂(x) gets used as
the uncertainty. This strategy is so common that it is commoditized: there are inbuilt PyTorch losses, such
as GaussianNLLLoss, that enable training a neural network this way. However, we usually know Ytest | Xtest
isn’t Gaussian, so even if we had infinite data, σ̂(x) would not necessarily be reliable. We can use conformal
prediction to turn this heuristic uncertainty notion into rigorous prediction intervals of the form fˆ(x)± q̂σ̂(x).
2.3.2

Other 1-D Uncertainty Estimates

More generally, we assume there is a function u(x) such that larger values encode more uncertainty. This
single number can have many interpretations beyond the standard deviation. For example, one instance of
an uncertainty scalar simply involves the user creating a model for the magnitude of the residual. In that
setting, the user would first fit a model fˆ that predicts y from x. Then, they would fit a second model
r̂ (possibly the same neural network), that predicts y − fˆ(x) . If r̂ were perfect, we would expect the set
i
h
fˆ(x) − r̂(x), fˆ(x) + r̂(x) to have perfect coverage. However, our learned model of the error r̂ is often poor
in practice.
There are many more such uncertainty scalars than we can discuss in this document in detail, including
1. measuring the variance of fˆ(x) across an ensemble of models,
2. measuring the variance of fˆ(x) when randomly dropping out a fraction of nodes in a neural net,
3. measuring the variance of fˆ(x) to small, random input perturbations,
4. measuring the variance of fˆ(x) over different noise samples input to a generative model,
5. measuring the magnitude of change in fˆ(x) when applying an adversarial perturbation, etc.
These cases will all be treated the same way. There will be some point prediction fˆ(x), and some uncertainty
scalar u(x) that is large when the model is uncertain and small otherwise (in the residual setting, u(x) := r̂(x),
and in the Gaussian setting, u(x) := σ̂(x)). We will proceed with this notation for the sake of generality,
but the reader should understand that u can be replaced with any function.
Now that we have our heuristic notion of uncertainty in hand, we can define a score function,
y − fˆ(x)
s(x, y) =

u(x)

9

.

# model(X)[:,0]=E(Y|X), and model(X)[:,1]=stddev(Y|X)
scores = abs(model(calib_X)[:,0]-calib_Y)/model(calib_X)[:,1]
# Get the score quantile
qhat = torch.quantile(scores,np.ceil((n+1)*(1-alpha))/n)
# Deploy (represent sets as tuple of lower and upper endpoints)
muhat, stdhat = (model(test_X)[:,0], model(test_X)[:,1])
prediction_sets = (muhat-stdhat*qhat, muhat+stdhat*qhat)

Figure 7: Python code for conformalized uncertainty scalars.

This score function has a natural interpretation: it is a multiplicative correction factor of the uncertainty
scalar (i.e., s(x, y)u(x) = y − fˆ(x) ). As before, taking q̂ to be the d(1−α)(n+1)e
quantile of the calibration
n
scores guarantees us that for a new example,
i
h
P [s(Xtest , Ytest ) ≤ q̂] ≥ 1 − α =⇒ P Ytest − fˆ(Xtest ) ≤ u(Xtest )q̂ ≥ 1 − α.

(5)

se

t

Naturally, we can then form prediction sets using the rule
h
i
C(x) = fˆ(x) − u(x)q̂, fˆ(x) + u(x)q̂ .

n
predictio

Figure 8: A visualization of the uncertainty scalars algorithm in Eq. (5). We produce the set by
adding and subtracting q̂u(x). The constant q̂ is picked during the calibration step.
Let’s reflect a bit on the nature of these prediction sets. The prediction sets are valid, as we desired.
Due to our construction, they are also symmetric about the prediction, fˆ(x), although symmetry could be
relaxed with minor modifications. However, uncertainty scalars do not necessarily scale properly with α. In
other words, there is no reason to believe that a quantity like σ̂ would be directly related to quantiles of
the label distribution. We tend to prefer quantile regression when possible, since it directly estimates this
quantity and thus should be a better heuristic (and in practice it usually is; see [10] for some evaluations).
Nonetheless, uncertainty scalars remain in use because they are easy to deploy and have been commoditized
in popular machine learning libraries. See Figure 7 for a Python implementation of this method.

2.4

Conformalizing Bayes

Our final example of conformal prediction will use a Bayesian model. Bayesian predictors, like Bayesian
neural networks, are commonly studied in the field of uncertainty quantification, but rely on many unverifiable
and/or incorrect assumptions to provide coverage. Nonetheless, we should incorporate any prior information
we have into our prediction sets. We will now show how to create valid prediction sets that are also Bayes
optimal among all prediction sets that achieve 1 − α coverage. These prediction sets use the posterior
predictive density as a conformal score. The Bayes optimality of this procedure was first proven in [11],
and was previously studied in [12, 13]. Because our algorithm reduces to picking the labels with high
posterior predictive density, the Python code will look exactly the same as in Figure 2. The only difference
is interpretation, since the softmax now represents an approximation of a continuous distribution rather than
a categorical one.
10

Let us first describe what a Bayesian would do, given a Bayesian model fˆ(y | x), which estimates the
value of the posterior distribution of Ytest at label y with input Xtest = x. If one believed all the necessary
assumptions—mainly, a correctly specified model and asymptotically large n—the following would be the
optimal prediction set:
Z
n
o
S(x) = y : fˆ(y | x) > t , where t is chosen so
fˆ(y | x)dy = 1 − α.
y∈S(x)

However, because we cannot make assumptions on the model and data, we can only consider fˆ(y | x) to be
a heuristic notion of uncertainty.
Following our now-familiar checklist, we can define a conformal score,
s(x, y) = −fˆ(y | x),
which is high when the model is uncertain and otherwise low. After computing q̂ over the calibration data,
we can then construct prediction sets:
n
o
C(x) = y : fˆ(y | x) > −q̂ .
(6)

prediction set

Figure 9: A visualization of the conformalized Bayes algorithm in Eq. (6). The prediction set is a
superlevel set of the posterior predictive density.
This set is valid because we chose the threshold q̂ via conformal prediction. Furthermore, when certain
technical assumptions are satisfied, it has the best Bayes risk among all prediction sets with 1 − α coverage.
To be more precise, under the assumptions in [11], C(Xtest ) has the smallest average size of any conformal
procedure with 1 − α coverage, where the average is taken over the data and the parameters. This result
should not be a surprise to those familiar with decision theory, as the argument we are making feels similar
to that of the Neyman-Pearson lemma. This concludes the final example.
Discussion
As our examples have shown, conformal prediction is a simple and pragmatic technique with many use
cases. It is also easy to implement and computationally trivial. Additionally, the above four examples serve
as roadmaps to the user for designing score functions with various notions of optimality, including average
size, adaptivity, and Bayes risk. Still more is yet to come—conformal prediction can be applied more broadly
than it may first seem at this point. We will outline extensions of conformal prediction to other prediction
tasks such as outlier detection, image segmentation, serial time-series prediction, and so on in Section 4.
Before addressing these extensions, we will take a deep dive into diagnostics for conformal prediction in the
standard setting, including the important topic of conditional coverage.

3

Evaluating Conformal Prediction

We have spent the last two sections learning how to form valid prediction sets satisfying rigorous statistical
guarantees. Now we will discuss how to evaluate them. Our evaluations will fall into one of two categories.
11

1. Evaluating adaptivity. It is extremely important to keep in mind that the conformal prediction
procedure with the smallest average set size is not necessarily the best. A good conformal prediction
procedure will give small sets on easy inputs and large sets on hard inputs in a way that faithfully
reflects the model’s uncertainty. This adaptivity is not implied by conformal prediction’s coverage
guarantee, but it is non-negotiable in practical deployments of conformal prediction. We will formalize
adaptivity, explore its consequences, and suggest practical algorithms for evaluating it.
2. Correctness checks. Correctness checks help you test whether you’ve implemented conformal prediction correctly. We will empirically check that the coverage satisfies Theorem 1. Rigorously evaluating
whether this property holds requires a careful accounting of the finite-sample variability present with
real datasets. We develop explicit formulae for the size of the benign fluctuations—if one observes
deviations from 1 − α in coverage that are larger than these formulae dictate, then there is a problem
with the implementation.
Many of the evaluations we suggest are computationally intensive, and require running the entire conformal procedure on different splits of data at least 100 times. Naı̈ve implementations of these evaluations can
be slow when the score takes a long time to compute. With some simple computational tricks and strategic
caching, we can speed this process up by orders of magnitude. Therefore to aid the reader, we intersperse
the mathematical descriptions with code to efficiently implement these computations.

3.1

Evaluating Adaptivity

Although any conformal procedure yields prediction intervals that satisfy (1), there are many such procedures,
and they differ in other important ways. In particular, a key design consideration for conformal prediction
is adaptivity: we want the procedure to return larger sets for harder inputs and smaller sets for easier
inputs. While most reasonable conformal procedures will satisfy this to some extent, we now discuss precise
metrics for adaptivity that allow the user to check a conformal procedure and to compare multiple alternative
conformal procedures.

#

#

Set size. The first step is to plot histograms of set sizes. This histogram helps us in two ways. Firstly,
a large average set size indicates the conformal procedure is not very precise, indicating a possible problem
with the score or underlying model. Secondly, the spread of the set sizes shows whether the prediction sets
properly adapt to the difficulty of examples. A wider spread is generally desirable, since it means that the
procedure is effectively distinguishing between easy and hard inputs.

set size

set size

It can be tempting to stop evaluations after plotting the coverage and set size, but certain important
questions remain unanswered. A good spread of set sizes is generally better, but it does not necessarily
indicate that the sets adapt properly to the difficulty of X. Above seeing that the set sizes have dynamic
range, we will need to verify that large sets occur for hard examples. We next formalize this notion and give
metrics for evaluating it.
Conditional coverage. Adaptivity is typically formalized by asking for the conditional coverage [14]
property:
P [Ytest ∈ C(Xtest ) | Xtest ] ≥ 1 − α.
(7)

12

That is, for every value of the input Xtest , we seek to return prediction sets with 1 − α coverage. This is
a stronger property than the marginal coverage property in (1) that conformal prediction is guaranteed to
achieve—indeed, in the most general case, conditional coverage is impossible to achieve [14]. In other words,
conformal procedures are not guaranteed to satisfy (7), so we must check how close our procedure comes to
approximating it.

no coverage

marginal

conditional
correctly covered example
incorrectly covered example
Group 2

Group 1

Group 2

Group 1

Group 2

Group 1

5% coverage

14% coverage

100% coverage

80% coverage

90% coverage

90% coverage

regression

errors by group

The difference between marginal and conditional coverage is subtle but of great practical importance, so
we will spend some time think about the differences here. Imagine there are two groups of people, group A
and group B, with frequencies 90% and 10%. The prediction sets always cover Y among people in group A
and never cover Y when the person comes from group B. Then the prediction sets have 90% coverage, but
not conditional coverage. Conditional coverage would imply that the prediction sets cover Y at least 90% of
the time in both groups. This is necessary, but not sufficient; conditional coverage is a very strong property
that states the probability of the prediction set needs to be ≥ 90% for a particular person. In other words,
for any subset of the population, the coverage should be ≥ 90%. See Figure 10 for a visualization of the
difference between conditional and marginal coverage.

Figure 10: Prediction sets with various notions of coverage: no coverage, marginal coverage, or
conditional coverage (at a level of 90%). In the marginal case, all the errors happen in the same groups and
regions in X-space. Conditional coverage disallows this behavior, and errors are evenly distributed.

Feature-stratified coverage metric. As a first metric for conditional coverage, we will formalize the
example we gave earlier, where coverage is unequal over some groups. The reader can think of these groups
as discrete categories, like race, or as a discretization of continuous features, like age ranges. Formally,
(val)
suppose we have features Xi,1 that take values in {1, . . . , G} for some G. (Here, i = 1, . . . , nval indexes the
example in the validation set, and the first coordinate of each feature is the group.) Let Ig ⊂ {1, . . . , nval }
(val)
be the set of observations such that Xi,1 = g for g = 1, . . . , G. Since conditional coverage implies that the
procedure has the same coverage for all values of Xtest , we use the following measure:
FSC metric :

o

1 X n (val)
(val)
1 Yi
∈ C Xi
g∈{1,...,G} |Ig |
min

i∈Ig

In words, this is the observed coverage among all instances where the discrete feature takes the value g. If
conditional coverage were achieved, this would be 1 − α, and values farther below 1 − α indicate a greater
violation of conditional coverage. Note that this metric can also be used with a continuous feature by binning
the features into a finite number of categories.

13

Size-stratified coverage metric. We next consider a more general-purpose metric for how close a conformal procedure comes to satisfying (7), introduced in [4]. First, we discretize the possible cardinalities of C(x),
into G bins, B1 , . . . , BG . For example, in classification we might divide the observations into three groups,
depending on whether C(x) has one element, two elements, or more than two elements. Let Ig ⊂ {1, . . . , nval }
be the set of observations falling in bin g for g = 1, . . . , G. Then we consider the following

o
1 X n (val)
(val)
1 Yi
∈ C Xi
SSC metric :
min
g∈{1,...,G} |Ig |
i∈Ig

In words, this is the observed coverage for all units for which the set size |C(x)| falls into bin g. As before,
if conditional coverage were achieved, this would be 1 − α, and values farther below 1 − α indicate a greater
violation of conditional coverage. Note that this is the same expression as for the FSC metric, except that
the definition of Ig has changed. Unlike the FSC metric, the user does not have to define an important set
of discrete features a-priori—it is a general metric that can apply to any example.
See [15] and [16] for additional metrics of conditional coverage.

3.2

The Effect of the Size of the Calibration Set

We first pause to discuss how the size of the calibration set affects conformal prediction. We consider this
question for two reasons. First, the user must choose this for a practical deployment. Roughly speaking, our
conclusion will that be choosing a calibration set of size n = 1000 is sufficient for most purposes. Second, the
size of the calibration set is one source of finite-sample variability that we will need to analyze to correctly
check the coverage. We will build on the results here in the next section, where we give a complete description
of how to check coverage in practice.
How does the size of the calibration set, n, affect conformal prediction? The coverage guarantee in (1)
holds for any n, so we can see that our prediction sets have coverage at least 1 − α even with a very small
calibration set. Intuitively, however, it may seem that larger n is better, and leads to more stable procedures.
This intuition is correct, and it explains why using a larger calibration set is beneficial in practice. The details
are subtle, so we carefully work through them here.
The key idea is that the coverage of conformal prediction conditionally on the calibration set is a random
quantity. That is, if we run the conformal prediction algorithm twice, each time sampling a new calibration
dataset, then check the coverage on an infinite number of validation points, those two numbers will not be
equal. The coverage property in (1) says that coverage will be at least 1 − α on average over the randomness
in the calibration set, but with any one fixed calibration set, the coverage on an infinite validation set will
be some number that is not exactly 1 − α. Nonetheless, we can choose n large enough to control these
fluctuations in coverage by analyzing its distribution.
In particular, the distribution of coverage has an analytic form, first introduced by Vladimir Vovk in [14],
namely,

P Ytest ∈ C (Xtest ) {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 ∼ Beta (n + 1 − l, l) ,
where
l = b(n + 1)αc.
Notice that the conditional expectation above is the coverage with an infinite validation data set, holding the
calibration data fixed. A simple proof of this fact is available in [14]. We plot the distribution of coverage
for several values of n in Figure 11.
Inspecting Figure 11, we see that choosing n = 1000 calibration points leads to coverage that is typically
between .88 and .92, hence our rough guideline of choosing about 1000 calibration points. More formally,
we can compute exactly the number of calibration points n needed to achieve a coverage of 1 − α ±  with
probability 1 − δ. Again, the average coverage is always at least 1 − α; the parameter δ controls the tail
probabilities of the coverage conditionally on the calibration data. For any δ, the required calibration set
size n can be explicitly computed from a simple expression, and we report on several values in Table 1 for
the reader’s reference. Code allowing the user to produce results for any choice of n and α accompanies the
table.
14

Distribution of coverage (infinite validation set)
n=100
n=1000
n=10000
1

0.82

0.84

0.86

0.88

0.90

0.92

0.94

0.96

0.98

Figure 11: The distribution of coverage with an infinite validation set is plotted for different values of
n with α = 0.1. The distribution converges to 1 − α with rate O n−1/2 .

n()

0.1
22

0.05
102

0.01
2491

0.005
9812

0.001
244390

Table 1: Calibration set size n() required for coverage slack  with δ = 0.1 and α = 0.1.

3.3

Checking for Correct Coverage

As an obvious diagnostic, the user will want to assess whether the conformal procedure has the correct
coverage. This can be accomplished by running the procedure over R trials with new calibration and
validation sets, and then calculating the empirical coverage for each,
Cj =

nval n

o
1 X
(val)
(val)
1 Yi,j
∈ Cj Xi,j
, for j = 1, ..., R,
nval i=1
(val)

(val)

where nval is the size of the validation set, (Xi,j , Yi,j ) is the ith validation example in trial j, and Cj is
calibrated using the calibration data from the jth trial. A histogram of the Cj should be centered at roughly
1 − α, as in Figure 11. Likewise, the mean value,
R

C=

1 X
Cj ,
R j=1

should be approximately 1 − α.
With real datasets, we only have n + nval data points total to evaluate our conformal algorithm and
therefore cannot draw new data for each of the R rounds. So, we compute the coverage values by randomly
splitting the n + nval data points R times into calibration and validation datasets, then running conformal.
Notice that rather than splitting the data points themselves many times, we can instead first cache all
conformal scores and then compute the coverage values over many random splits, as in the code sample in
Figure 12.
If properly implemented, conformal prediction is guaranteed to satisfy the inequality in (1). However, if
the reader sees minor fluctuations in the observed coverage, they may not need to worry: the finiteness of
n, nval , and R can lead to benign fluctuations in coverage which add some width to the Beta distribution
in Figure 11. Appendix C gives exact theory for analyzing the mean and standard deviation of C. From
this, we will be able to tell if any deviation from 1 − α indicates a problem with the implementation, or
15

try: # try loading the scores first
scores = np.load('scores.npy')
except:
# X and Y have n + n_val rows each
scores = get_scores(X,Y)
np.save(scores, 'scores.npy')
# calculate the coverage R times and store in list
coverages = np.zeros((R,))
for r in range(R):
np.random.shuffle(scores) # shuffle
calib_scores, val_scores = (scores[:n],scores[n:]) # split
qhat = np.quantile(calib_scores, np.ceil((n+1)*(1-alpha)/n), method='higher') # calibrate
coverages[r] = (val_scores <= qhat).astype(float).mean() # see caption
average_coverage = coverages.mean() # should be close to 1-alpha
plt.hist(coverages) # should be roughly centered at 1-alpha

Figure 12: Python code for computing coverage with efficient score caching. Notice that from the
expression for conformal sets in (2), a validation point is covered if and only if s(X, Y ) ≤ q̂, which is how
the third to last line is succinctly computing the coverage.
if it is benign. Code for checking the coverage at all different values of n, nval , and R is available in the
accompanying Jupyter notebook of Figure 12.

4

Extensions of Conformal Prediction

At this point, we have seen the core of the matter: how to construct prediction sets with coverage in
any standard supervised prediction problem. We now broaden our horizons towards prediction tasks with
different structure, such as side information, covariate shift, and so on. These more exotic problems arise
quite frequently in the real world, so we present practical conformal algorithms to address them.

4.1

Group-Balanced Conformal Prediction

In certain settings, we might want prediction intervals that have equal error rates across certain subsets of
the data. For example, we may require our medical classifier to have coverage that is correct for all racial
and ethnic groups. To formalize this, we suppose that the first feature of our inputs, Xi,1 , i = 1, ..., n takes
values in some discrete set {1, ..., G} corresponding to categorical groups. We then ask for group-balanced
coverage:
P (Ytest ∈ C(Xtest ) | Xtest,1 = g) ≥ 1 − α,
(8)
for all groups g ∈ {1, . . . , G}. In words, this means we have a 1 − α coverage rate for all groups. Notice that
the group output could be a post-processing of the original features in the data. For example, we might bin
the values of Xtest into a discrete set.
Recall that a standard application of conformal prediction will not necessarily yield coverage within each
group simultaneously—that is, (8) may not be satisfied. We saw an example in Figure 10; the marginal
guarantee from normal conformal prediction can still be satisfied even if all errors happen in one group.
In order to achieve group-balanced coverage, we will simply run conformal prediction seperately for each
group, as visualized below.

16

Making this formal, given a conformal score function s, we stratify the scores on the calibration set by
group,
(g)
si = s(Xj , Yj ), where Xj,1 is the ith occurrence of group g.
Then, within each group, we calculate the conformal quantile
 (g)
!
(n
+
1)(1
−
α)
, where n(g) is the number of examples of group g.
q̂ (g) = Quantile s1 , ..., sn(g) ;
n(g)
Finally, we form prediction sets by first picking the relevant quantile,
n
o
C(x) = y : s(x, y) ≤ q̂ (x1 ) .
That is, for a point x that we see falls in group x1 , we use the threshold q̂ (x1 ) to form the prediction set, and
so on. This choice of C satisfies (8), as was first documented by Vovk in [14].
Proposition 1 (Error control guarantee for group-balanced conformal prediction). Suppose (X1 , Y1 ), . . . ,
(Xn , Yn ), (Xtest , Ytest ) are an i.i.d. sample from some distribution. Then the set C defined above satisfies the
error control property in (8).

4.2

Class-Conditional Conformal Prediction

In classification problems, we might similarly ask for coverage on every ground truth class. For example, if we
had a medical classifier assigning inputs to class normal or class cancer, we might ask that the prediction sets
are 95% accurate both when the ground truth is class cancer and also when the ground truth is class normal.
Formally, we return to the classification setting, where Y = {1, ..., K}. We seek to achieve class-balanced
coverage,
P (Ytest ∈ C(Xtest ) | Ytest = y) ≥ 1 − α,
(9)
for all classes y ∈ {1, . . . , K}.
To achieve class-balanced coverage, we will calibrate within each class separately. The algorithm will be
similar to the group-balanced coverage of Section 4.1, but we must modify it because we do not know the
correct class at test time. (In contrast, in Section 4.1, we observed the group information Xtest,1 as an input
feature.) See the visualization below.

17

Turning to the algorithm, given a conformal score function s, stratify the scores on the calibration set by
class,
(k)
si = s(Xj , Yj ), where Yj is the ith occurrence of class k.
Then, within each class, we calculate the conformal quantile,
 (k)
!
(n + 1)(1 − α)
(k)
, where n(k) is the number of examples of class k.
q̂ = Quantile s1 , ..., sn(k) ;
n(k)
Finally, we iterate through our classes and include them in the prediction set based on their quantiles:
o
n
C(x) = y : s(x, y) ≤ q̂ (y) .
Notice that in the preceding display, we take a provisional value of the response, y, and then use the conformal
threshold q̂ (y) to determine if it is included in the prediction set. This choice of C satisfies (9), as proven by
Vovk in [14]; another version can be found in [6].
Proposition 2 (Error control guarantee for class-balanced conformal prediction). Suppose (X1 , Y1 ), . . . ,
(Xn , Yn ), (Xtest , Ytest ) are an i.i.d. sample from some distribution. Then the set C defined above satisfies the
error control property in (9).

4.3

Conformal Risk Control

So far, we have used conformal prediction to construct prediction sets that bound the miscoverage,


P Ytest ∈
/ C(Xtest ) ≤ α.

(10)

However, for many machine learning problems, the natural notion of error is not miscoverage. Here we show
that conformal prediction can also provide guarantees of the form
h
i
E ` C(Xtest ), Ytest ≤ α,
(11)
for any bounded loss function ` that shrinks as C grows. This is called a conformal
 risk control guarantee. Note that (11) recovers (10) when using the miscoverage loss, ` C(Xtest ), Ytest = 1 {Ytest ∈
/ C(Xtest )}.
However, this algorithm also extends conformal prediction to situations where other loss functions, such as
the false negative rate (FNR), are more appropriate.
As an example, consider multilabel classification. Here, the response Yi ⊆ {1, ..., K} a subset of K classes.
Given a trained model f : X → [0, 1]K , we wish to output sets that include a large fraction of the true classes
in Yi . To that end, we post-process the model’s raw outputs into the set of classes with sufficiently high
scores, Cλ (x) = {k : f (X)k ≥ 1 − λ}. Note that as the threshold λ grows, we include more classes in
Cλ (x)—it becomes more conservative in that we are less likely to omit true classes. Conformal risk control
can be used to find a threshold value λ̂ that controls
the fraction of missed classes. That is, λ̂ can be chosen

so that the expected value of ` Cλ̂ (Xtest ), Ytest = 1 − |Ytest ∩ Cλ (Xtest )|/|Ytest | is guaranteed to fall below
a user-specified error rate α. For example, setting α = 0.1 ensures that Cλ̂ (Xtest ) contains 90% of the true
classes in Ytest on average. We will work through a multilabel classification example in detail in Section 5.1.
Formally, we will consider post-processing the predictions of the model f to create a prediction set Cλ (·).
The prediction set has a parameter λ that encodes its level of conservativeness: larger λ values yield more
conservative outputs (e.g., larger prediction sets). To measure the quality of the output of Cλ , we consider
a loss function `(Cλ (x), y) ∈ (−∞, B] for some B < ∞. We require the loss function to be non-increasing as
a function of λ. The following algorithm picks λ̂ so that risk control as in (11) holds:


B−α
b
λ̂ = inf λ : R(λ)
≤α−
,
(12)
n
18



b
where R(λ)
= ` Cλ (X1 ), Y1 + . . . + ` Cλ (Xn ), Yn /n is the empirical risk on the calibration data. Note
that this algorithm simply corresponds to tuning based on the empirical risk at a slightly more conservative
level than α. For example, if B = 1, α = 0.1, and we have n = 1000 calibration points, then we select λ̂ to
be the value where empirical risk hits level λ̂ = 0.0991 instead of 0.1.

Then the prediction set Cλ̂ (Xtest ) satisfies (11).
Theorem 2 (Conformal Risk Control [17]). Suppose (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ), (Xtest , Ytest ) are an i.i.d. sample
from some distribution. Further, suppose ` is a monotone function of λ, i.e., one satisfying


` Cλ1 (x), y ≥ ` Cλ2 (x), y
(13)
for all (x, y) and λ1 ≤ λ2 . Then


E ` Cλ̂ (Xtest ), Ytest ≤ α,
where λ̂ is picked as in (12).
Theory and worked examples of conformal risk control are presented in [17]. In Sections 5.1 and 5.2 we
show a worked example of conformal risk control applied to tumor segmentation. Furthermore, Appendix A
describes a more powerful technique called Learn then Test [18] capable of controlling general risks that do
not satisfy (13).

4.4

Outlier Detection

Conformal prediction can also be adapted to handle unsupervised outlier detection. Here, we have access to
a clean dataset X1 , . . . , Xn and wish to detect when test points do not come from the same distribution. As
before, we begin with a heuristic model that tries to identify outliers; a larger score means that the model
judges the point more likely to be an outlier. We will then use a variant of conformal prediction to calibrate
it to have statistical guarantees. In particular, we will guarantee that it does not return too many false
positives.
Formally, we will construct a function that labels test points as outliers or inliers, C : X → {outlier, inlier},
such that
P (C(Xtest ) = outlier) ≤ α,
(14)
where the probability is over Xtest , a fresh sample from the clean-data distribution. The algorithm for
achieving (14) is similar to the usual conformal algorithm. We start with a conformal score s : X → R (note
that since we are in the unsupervised setting, the score only depends on the features). Next, we compute the
conformal score on the clean data: si = s(Xi ) for i = 1, . . . , n. Then, we compute the conformal threshold
in the usual way:

!
(n + 1)(1 − α)
.
q̂ = quantile s1 , . . . , sn ;
n
Lastly, when we encounter a test point, we declare it to be an outlier if the score exceeds q̂:
(
inlier
if s(x) ≤ q̂
C(x) =
.
outlier if s(x) > q̂
This construction guarantees error control, as we record next.
19

Proposition 3 (Error control guarantee for outlier detection). Suppose X1 , . . . , Xn , Xtest are an i.i.d. sample from some distribution. Then the set C defined above satisfies the error control property in (14).
As with standard conformal prediction, the score function is very important for the method to perform
well—that is, to be effective at flagging outliers. Here, we wish to choose the score function to effectively
distinguish the type of outliers that we expect to see in the test data from the clean data. The general
problem of training models to distinguish outliers is sometimes called anomaly detection, novelty detection,
or one-class classification, and there are good out-of-the box methods for doing this; see [19] for an overview
of outlier detection. Conformal outlier detection can also be seen as a hypothesis testing problem; points
that are rejected as outliers have a p-value less than alpha for the null hypothesis of exchangeability with the
calibration data. This interpretation is closely related to the classical permutation test [20, 21]. See [22–24]
for more on this interpretation and other statistical properties of conformal outlier detection.

4.5

Conformal Prediction Under Covariate Shift

All previous conformal methods rely on Theorem 1, which assumes that the incoming test points come from
the same distribution as the calibration points. However, past data is not necessarily representative of future
data in practice.
One type of distribution shift that conformal prediction can handle is covariate shift. Covariate shift
refers to the situation where the distribution of Xtest changes from P to Ptest , but the relationship between
Xtest and Ytest , i.e. the distribution of Ytest |Xtest , stays fixed.

Imagine our calibration features {Xi }ni=1 are drawn independently from P but our test feature Xtest is
drawn from Ptest . Then, there has been a covariate shift, and the data are no longer i.i.d. This problem is
common in the real world. For example,
• You are trying to predict diseases from MRI scans. You conformalized on a balanced dataset of 50%
infants and 50% adults, but in reality, the frequency is 5% infants and 95% adults. Deploying the
model in the real world would invalidate coverage; the infants are over-represented in our sample, so
diseases present during infancy will be over-predicted. This was a covariate shift in age.
• You are trying to do instance segmentation, i.e., to segment each object in an image from the background. You collected your calibration images in the morning but seek to deploy your system in the
afternoon. The amount of sunlight has changed, and more people are eating lunch. This was a covariate
shift in the time of day.
To address the covariate shift from P to Ptest , one can form valid prediction sets with weighted conformal
prediction, first developed in [25].
In weighted conformal prediction, we account for covariate shift by upweighting conformal scores from
calibration points that would be more likely under the new distribution. We will be using the likelihood ratio
w(x) =

dPtest (x)
;
dP(x)

20

usually this is just the ratio of the new PDF to the old PDF at the point x. Now we define our weights,
pw
i (x) = P
n

w(Xi )
w(Xj ) + w(x)

and pw
test (x) = P
n

j=1

w(x)

.

w(Xj ) + w(x)

j=1

w
Intuitively, the weight pw
i (x) is large when Xi is likely under the new distribution, and ptest (x) is large when
the input x is likely under the new distribution. We can then express our conformal quantile as the 1 − α
quantile of a reweighted distribution,
(
)
j
X
w
q̂(x) = inf sj :
pi (x)1 {si ≤ sj } ≥ 1 − α ,
i=1

1.0

Standard conformal

q

0.5

0.0

weighted CDF of scores

weighted CDF of scores

where above for notational convenience we assume that the scores are ordered from smallest to largest
a-priori. The choice of quantile is the key step in this algorithm, so we pause to parse it. First of all,
notice that the quantile is now a function of an input x, although the dependence is only minor. Choosing
1
w
pw
the familiar case of conformal prediction—all points are equally weighted, so
i (x) = ptest (x) = n+1 gives


we end up choosing the (n + 1)(1 − α) th-smallest score as our quantile. When there is covariate shift,
we instead re-weight the calibration points with non-equal weights to match the test distribution. If the
covariate shift makes easier values of x more likely, it makes our quantile smaller. This happens because the
covariate shift puts more weight on small scores—see the diagram below. Of course, the opposite holds the
covariate shift upweights difficult values of x: so the covariate-shift-adjusted quantile grows.

0.0

0.5
score

1.0

1.0

Covariate shift conformal

q

0.5

0.0

0.0

0.5
score

1.0

With this quantile function in hand, we form our prediction set in the standard way,
C(x) = {y : s(x, y) ≤ q̂(x)} .
By accounting for the covariate shift in our choice of q̂, we were able to make our calibration data look
exchangeable with the test point, achieving the following guarantee.
Theorem 3 (Conformal prediction under covariate shift [25]). Suppose (X1 , Y1 ), ..., (Xn , Yn ) are drawn i.i.d.
from P × PY |X and that (Xtest , Ytest ) is drawn independently from Ptest × PY |X . Then the choice of C above
satisfies
P (Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )) ≥ 1 − α.
Conformal prediction under various distribution shifts is an active and important area of research with
many open challenges. This algorithm addresses a somewhat restricted case—that of a known covariate
shift—but is nonetheless quite practical.

4.6

Conformal Prediction Under Distribution Drift

Another common form of distribution shift is distribution drift: slowly varying changes in the data distribution. For example, when collecting time-series data, the data distribution may change—furthermore, it may
21

change in a way that is unknown or difficult to estimate. Here, one can imagine using weights that give more
weight to recent conformal scores. The following theory provides some justification for such weighted conformal procedures; in particular, they always satisfy marginal coverage, and are exact when the magnitude
of the distribution shift is known.
More formally, suppose the calibration data {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 are drawn independently from different distributions {Pi }ni=1 and the test point (Xtest , Ytest ) is drawn from Ptest . Given some weight schedule w1 , ..., wn ,
wi ∈ [0, 1], we will consider the calculation of weighted quantiles using the calibration data:
(
)
n
X
q̂ = inf q :
w̃i 1 {si ≤ q} ≥ 1 − α ,
i=1

where the w̃i are normalized weights,
w̃i =

wi
.
w1 + . . . + wn + 1

Then we can construct prediction sets in the usual way,
C(x) = {y : s(x, y) ≤ q̂} .
We now state a theorem showing that when the distribution is shifting, it is a good idea to apply a discount
factor to old samples. In particular, let i = dTV (Xi , Yi ), (Xtest , Ytest ) be the TV distance between the
ith data point and the test data point. The TV distance is a measure of how much the distribution has
shifted—a large i (close to 1) means the ith data point is not representative of the new test point. The
result states that if w discounts those points with large shifts, the coverage remains close to 1 − α.

Theorem 4 (Conformal prediction under distribution drift [26]). Suppose i = dTV (Xi , Yi ), (Xtest , Ytest ) .
Then the choice of C above satisfies
P (Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )) ≥ 1 − α − 2

n
X

w̃i i .

i=1

When either factor in the product w̃i i is small, that means that the ith data point doesn’t result in
loss of coverage. In other words, if there isn’t much distribution shift, we can place a high weight on that
data point without much penalty, and vice versa. Setting i = 0 above, we can also see that when there is
no distribution shift, there is no loss in coverage regardless of what choice of weights is used—this fact had
been observed previously in [25, 27].
The i are never known exactly in advance—we only have some heuristic sense of their size. In practice,
for time-series problems, it often suffices to pick either a rolling window of size K or a smooth decay using
some domain knowledge about the speed of the drift:
wifixed = 1 {i ≥ n − K}

or

widecay = 0.99n−i+1 .

We give a worked example of this procedure for a distribution shifting over time in Section 5.3.
As a final point on this algorithm, we note that there is some cost to using this or any other weighted
conformal procedure. In particular, the weights determine the effective sample size of the distribution:
neff (w1 , . . . , wn ) =

w1 + . . . + wn
.
w12 + . . . + wn2

This is quite important in practice, since the variance of the weighted
√ conformal procedure can explode when
neff is small; as in Section 3, the variance of coverage scales as 1/ neff , which can be large if too many of the
wi are small. To see more of the theory of weighted conformal prediction under distribution drift, see [26].

22

5

Worked Examples

We now show several worked examples of the techniques described in Section 4. For each example, we
provide Jupyter notebooks that allow the results to be conveniently replicated and extended.

5.1
person
bed
laptop

Multilabel Classification
giraffe

wine glass
fork
bowl
sandwich
orange
dining table
cake

person
bus
backpack
handbag
suitcase
train
boat

bicycle
bottle
knife
spoon
sandwich
cake
dining table
potted plant
person

Figure 13: Examples of false negative rate control in multilabel classification on the MS COCO
dataset with α = 0.1. False negatives are red, false positives are blue, and true positives are black.
In the multilabel classification setting, we receive an image and predict which of K objects are in an
image. We have a pretrained model fˆ that outputs estimated probabilities for each of the K classes. We
wish to report on the possible classes contained in the image, returning most of the true labels. To this end,
we will threshold the model’s outputs to get the subset of K classes that the model thinks is most likely,
Cλ (x) = {y : fˆ(x) ≥ λ}, which we call the prediction. We will use conformal risk control (Section 4.3) to
pick the threshold value λ certifying a low false negative rate (FNR), i.e., to guarantee the average fraction
of ground truth classes that the model missed is less than α.
More formally, our calibration set {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 contains exchangeable images Xi and sets of classes Yi ⊆
{1, ..., K}. With the notation of Section 4.3, we set our loss function to be `FNR (Cλ (x), y) = 1−|Cλ (x)∩y|/|y|.
Then, picking λ̂ as in 12 yields a bound on the false negative rate,


E `FNR Cλ̂ (Xtest ), Ytest ≤ α.
Figure 13 gives results and code for FNR control on the Microsoft Common Objects in Context dataset [28].

5.2

Tumor Segmentation

Figure 14: Examples of false negative rate control in tumor segmentation with α = 0.1. False
negatives are red, false positives are blue, and true positives are black.
In the tumor segmentation setting, we receive an M × N × 3 image of a tumor and predict an M × N
binary mask, where ‘1’ indicates a tumor pixel. We start with a pretrained segmentation model fˆ that
outputs an M × N grid of the estimated probabilities that each pixel is a tumor pixel. We will threshold
the model’s outputs to get our predicted binary mask, Cλ (x) = {(i, j) : fˆ(x)(i,j) ≥ λ}, which we call the
23

prediction. We will use conformal risk control (Section 4.3) to pick the threshold value λ certifying a low
FNR, i.e., guaranteeing the average fraction of tumor pixels missed is less than α.
More formally, our calibration set {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 contains exchangeable images Xi and sets of tumor pixels
Yi ⊆ {1, . . . , M } × {1, . . . , N }. As in the previous example, we let the loss be the false negative proportion,
`FNR . Then, picking λ̂ as in 12 yields the bound on the FNR in 5.1. Figure 14 gives results and code on a
dataset of gut polyps.

Weather Prediction with Time-Series Distribution Shift
0.95
temperature ( C)

coverage
(size 500 sliding window)

5.3

0.90
0.85
weighted
unweighted

0.80
0

20000

40000 60000
timestamp

80000

100000

prediction
ground truth
weighted conformal interval

40
20
0

99700

99800

timestamp

99900

100000

Figure 15: Conformal prediction for time-series temperature estimation with α = 0.1. On the
left is a plot of coverage over time; ‘weighted’ denotes the procedure in Section 5.3 while ‘unweighted’ denotes
the procedure that simply computes the conformal quantile on all conformal scores seen so far. Note that we
compute coverage using a sliding window of 500 points, which explains some of the variability in the coverage.
Running the notebook with a trailing average of 5000 points reveals that the unweighted version systematically
undercovers before the change-point as well. On the right is a plot showing the intervals resulting from the
weighted procedure.
In this example we seek to predict the temperature of different locations on Earth given covariates such
as the latitude, longitude, altitude, atmospheric pressure, and so on. We will make these predictions serially
in time. Dependencies between adjacent data points induced by local and global weather changes violate
the standard exchangeability assumption, so we will need to apply the method from Section 4.6.

T
In this setting, we have a time series (Xt , Yt ) t=1 , where the Xt are tabular covariates and the Yt ∈ R
are temperatures in degrees Celsius. Note that these data points are not exchangeable or i.i.d.; adjacent data
points will be correlated. We start with a pretrained model fˆ taking features and predicting temperature
and an uncertainty model û takes features and outputs a scalar notion of uncertainty. Following Section 2.3,
we compute the conformal scores
Yt − fˆ(Xt )
st =
.
û(Xt )
Since we observe the data points sequentially, we also observe the scores sequentially, and we will need
to pick a different conformal quantile for each incoming data point. More formally, consider the task of
predicting the temperature at time t ≤ T . We use the weighted conformal technique in Section 5.3 with the
fixed K-sized window wt0 = 1 {t0 ≥ t − K} for all t0 < t. This yields the quantiles
(
)
t−1
X
1
0
q̂t = inf q :
st0 1 {t ≥ t − K} ≥ 1 − α .
min(K, t0 − 1) + 1 0
t =1

With these adjusted quantiles in hand, we form prediction sets at each time step in the usual way,
h
i
C(Xt ) = fˆ(Xt ) − q̂t û(Xt ) , fˆ(Xt ) + q̂t û(Xt ) .

24

We run this procedure on the Yandex Weather Prediction dataset. This dataset is part of the Shifts
Project [29], which also provides an ensemble of 10 pretrained CatBoost [30] models for making the temperature predictions. We take the average prediction of these models as our base model fˆ. Each of the models
has its own internal variance; we take the average of these variances as our uncertainty scalar û. The dataset
includes an in-distribution split of fresh data from the same time frame that the base model was trained
and an out-of-distribution split consisting of time windows the model has never seen. We concatenate these
datasets in time, leading to a large change point in the score distribution. Results in Figure 15 show that the
weighted method works better than a naive unweighted conformal baseline, achieving the desired coverage in
steady-state and recovering quickly from the change point. There is no hope of measuring the TV distance
between adjacent data points in order to apply Theorem 4, so we cannot get a formal coverage bound.
Nonetheless, the procedure is useful with this simple fixed window of weights, which we chose with only
a heuristic understanding of the distribution drift speed. It is worth noting that conformal prediction for
time-series applications is a particularly active area of research currently, and the method we have presented
is not clearly the best. See [31–33] and [34] for two differing perspectives.

5.4

Toxic Online Comment Identification via Outlier Detection

True Negative:

ХОТЕЛОСЬ БЫ УЗНАТЬ ,КАК В ЭТОМ ГОДУ БУДУ ТПРОИЗВОДИТЬ СПУСК ВОДЫ И БУДУТ ЛИ ЗАТОПЛЕНИЯ
I would like to know how water will be drained this year and whether there will be ﬂooding.

False Negative:

votre petit discours provocateur à souhait n a pas plus d eﬀet sur moi qu un pet de lapin sur une toile cirée
your provocative little speech has no more eﬀect on me than a rabbit fart on an oilcloth

False Positive:

Bah, sono completamente d accordo con te, e questa dovrebbe essere un enciclopedia libera???? veramente ridicolo!
Bah, I completely agree with you, and this is supposed to be a free encyclopedia ????

True Positive:

CALLATE BOT DE M****A SIN VIDA SOCIAL
SHUT UP, BOT OF S**T WITHOUT A SOCIAL LIFE

Figure 16: Examples of toxic online comment identification with type-1 error control at level
α = 0.1 on the Jigsaw Multilingual Toxic Comment Classification dataset.
We provide a type-1 error guarantee on a model that flags toxic online comments, such as threats,
obscenity, insults, and identity-based hate. Suppose we are given n non-toxic text samples X1 , ..., Xn and
asked whether a new text sample Xtest is toxic. We also have a pre-trained toxicity prediction model
fˆ(x) ∈ [0, 1], where values closer to 1 indicate a higher level of toxicity. The goal is to flag as many toxic
comments as possible while not flagging more than α proportion of non-toxic comments.
The outlier detection procedure in Section 4.4 applies immediately. First, we run the model on each
calibration point, yielding conformal scores si = fˆ(Xi ). Taking the toxicity threshold q̂ to be the d(n +
1)(1 − α)e-smallest of the si , we construct the function
(
inlier
fˆ(x) ≤ q̂
C(x) =
outlier fˆ(x) > q̂.
This gives the guarantee in Proposition 3—no more than α fraction of future nontoxic text will be classified
as toxic.
Figure 16 shows results of this procedure using the Unitary Detoxify BERT-based model [35, 36] on the
Jigsaw Multilingual Toxic Comment Classification dataset from the WILDS benchmark [37]. It is composed
of comments from the talk channels of Wikipedia pages. With a type-1 error of α = 10%, the system
correctly flags 70% of all toxic comments.

5.5

Selective Classification

In many situations, we only want to show a model’s predictions when it is confident. For example, we may
only want to make medical diagnoses when the model will be 95% accurate, and otherwise to say “I don’t

25

1.0

prediction kept

prediction abstained

Y=stingray, Y=stingray

Y=red fox, Y=kit fox

0.8
0.6
accuracy
fraction kept

0.4
0.2
0.0

1
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Figure 17: Results using selective classification on Imagenet with α = 0.1.

know.” We next demonstrate a system that strategically abstains in order to achieve a higher accuracy than
the base model in the problem of image classification.
More formally, given image-class pairs {(Xi , Yi )}n and an image classifier fˆ, we seek to ensure
i=1


P Ytest = Yb (Xtest ) Pb(Xtest ) ≥ λ̂ ≥ 1 − α,


(15)

where Yb (x) = arg maxy fˆ(x)y , Pb(Xtest ) = maxy fˆ(x)y , and λ̂ is a threshold chosen using the calibration
data. This is called a selective accuracy guarantee, because the accuracy is only computed over a subset of
high-confidence predictions. This quantity cannot be controlled with techniques we’ve seen so far, since we
are not guaranteed that model accuracy is monotone in the cutoff λ. Nonetheless, it can be handled with
Learn then Test—a framework for controlling arbitrary risks (see Appendix A). We show only the special
case of controlling selective classification accuracy here.
We pick the threshold using based on the empirical estimate of selective accuracy on the calibration set,
b
R(λ)
=

n
n
o
o
n
X
1 X n
1 Yi 6= Yb (Xi ) and Pb(Xi ) ≥ λ , where n(λ) =
1 Pb(Xi ) ≥ λ .
n(λ) i=1
i=1

Since this function is not monotone in λ, we will choose λ̂ differently than in Section 4.3. In particular,
we will scan across values of λ looking at a conservative upper bound for the true risk (i.e., the top end
b
of a confidence interval for the selective misclassification rate). Realizing that R(λ)
is a Binomial random
variable with n(λ) trials, we upper-bound the misclassification error as
n
o
b+ (λ) = sup r : BinomCDF(R(λ);
b
R
n(λ), r) ≥ δ
for some user-specified failure rate δ ∈ [0, 1]. Then, scan the upper bound until the last time the bound
exceeds α,
n
o
b+ (λ0 ) ≤ α for all λ0 ≥ λ .
λ̂ = inf λ : R
Deploying the threshold λ̂ will satisfy (15) with high probability.
Proposition 4. Assume the {(Xi , Yi )}ni=1 and (Xtest , Ytest ) are i.i.d. and λ̂ is chosen as above. Then (15)
is satisfied with probability 1 − δ.
See results on Imagenet at level α = 0.1 in Figure 17. For a deeper dive into this procedure and techniques
for controlling other non-monotone risks, see Appendix A.

26

6

Full conformal prediction

Up to this point, we have only considered split conformal prediction, otherwise known as inductive conformal
prediction. This version of conformal prediction is computationally attractive, since it only requires fitting
the model one time, but it sacrifices statistical efficiency because it requires splitting the data into training
and calibration datasets. Next, we consider full conformal prediction, or transductive conformal prediction,
which avoids data splitting at the cost of many more model fits. Historically, full conformal prediction was
developed first, and then split conformal prediction was later recognized as an important special case. Next,
we describe full conformal prediction. This discussion is motivated from three points of view. First, full
conformal prediction is an elegant, historically important idea in our field. Second, the exposition will reveal
a complimentary interpretation of conformal prediction as a hypothesis test. Lastly, full conformal prediction
is a useful algorithm when statistical efficiency is of paramount importance.

6.1

Full Conformal Prediction

This topic requires expanded notation. Let (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) be n + 1 exchangeable data points.
As before, the user sees (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ) and Xn+1 , and wishes to make a prediction set that contains
Yn+1 . But unlike split conformal prediction, we allow the model to train on all the data points, so there is
no separate calibration dataset.
The core idea of full conformal prediction is as follows. We know that the true label, Yn+1 , lives somewhere
in Y — so if we loop over all possible y ∈ Y, then we will eventually hit the data point (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ),
which is exchangeable with the first n data points. Full conformal prediction is so-named because it directly
computes this loop. For each y ∈ Y, we fit a new model fˆy to the augmented dataset (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn+1 , y).
Importantly, the model fitting for fˆ must be invariant to permutations of the data. Then, we compute a
score function syi = s(Xi , Yi , fˆy ) for i = 1,. . . ,n and syn+1 = s(Xn+1 , y, fˆy ). This score function is exactly
the same as those from Section 2, except that the model fˆy is now given as an argument because it is no
longer fixed. Then, we calculate the conformal quantile,


d(n + 1)(1 − α)e
.
q̂ y = Quantile sy1 , . . . , syn ;
n
Then, we collect all values of y that are sufficiently consistent with the previous data (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn )
are collected into a confidence set for the unknown value of Yn+1 :
C(Xtest ) = {y : syn+1 ≤ q̂ y }.

(16)

This prediction set has the same validity guarantee as before:
Theorem 5 (Full conformal coverage guarantee [1]). Suppose (X1 , Y1 ), ..., (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ) are drawn i.i.d.
from P, and that fˆ is a symmetric algorithm. Then the choice of C above satisfies
P (Yn+1 ∈ C(Xn+1 )) ≥ 1 − α.
More generally, the above holds for exchangeable random variables (X1 , Y1 ), ..., (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ); the proof
Yn+1
Y
Y
of Theorem 5 critically relies on the fact that the score sn+1
is exchangeable with s1 n+1 , . . . , snn+1 . We defer
the proof to [1], and note that upper bound in (1) also holds when the score function is continuous.
What about computation? In principle, to compute (16), we must iterate over all y ∈ Y, which leads to a
substantial computational burden. (When Y is continuous, we would typically first discretize the space and
then check each element in a finite set.) For example, if |Y | = K, then computing (16) requires (n + 1) · K
model fits. For some specific score functions, the set in (16) can actually be computed exactly even for
continuous Y , and we refer the reader to [1] and [38] for a summary of such cases and [39, 40] for recent
developments. Still, full conformal prediction is generally computationally costly.

27

Lastly, we give a statistical interpretation for the prediction set in (16). The condition
syn+1 ≤ q̂ y
is equivalent to the acceptance condition of a certain permutation test. To see this, consider a level α
permutation test for the exchangeability of sy1 , . . . , syn and the test score syn+1 , rejecting when the score
function is large. The values of y such that the test does not reject are exactly those in (16). In words, the
confidence set is all values of y such that the hypothetical data point is consistent with the other data, as
judged by this permutation test. We again refer the reader to [1] for more on this viewpoint on conformal
prediction.

6.2

Cross-Conformal Prediction, CV+, and Jackknife+

Split conformal prediction requires only one model fitting step, but sacrifices statistical efficiency. On the
other hand, full conformal prediction requires a very large number of model fitting steps, but has high
statistical efficiency. These are not the only two achievable points on the spectrum—there are techniques
that fall in between, trading off statistical efficiency and computational efficiency differently. In particular,
cross-conformal prediction [41] and CV+/Jackknife+ [42] both use a small number of model fits, but still use
all data for both model fitting and calibration. We refer the reader to those works for a precise description
of the algorithms and corresponding statistical guarantees.

7

Historical Notes on Conformal Prediction

We hope the reader has enjoyed reading the technical content in our gentle introduction. As a dénouement,
we now pay homage to the history of conformal prediction. Specifically, we will trace the history of techniques
related to conformal prediction that are distribution-free, i.e., (1) agnostic to the model, (2) agnostic to the
data distribution, and (3) valid in finite samples. There are other lines of work in statistics with equal
claim to the term “distribution-free” especially when it is interpreted asymptotically, such as permutation
tests [43], quantile regression [9], rank tests [44–46], and even the bootstrap [47, 48]—the following is not a
history of those topics. Rather, we focus on the progenitors and progeny of conformal prediction.

Origins
The story of conformal prediction begins sixty-three kilometers north of the seventh-largest city in Ukraine, in
the mining town of Chervonohrad in the Oblast of Lviv, where Vladimir Vovk spent his childhood. Vladimir’s
parents were both medical professionals, of Ukrainian descent, although the Lviv region changed hands many
times over the years. During his early education, Vovk recalls having very few exams, with grades mostly
based on oral answers. He did well in school and eventually took first place in the Mathematics Olympiad
in Ukraine; he also got a Gold Medal, meaning he was one of the top graduating secondary school students.
Perhaps because he was precocious, his math teacher would occupy him in class by giving him copies of a
magazine formerly edited by Isaak Kikoin and Andrey Kolmogorov, Kvant, where he learned about physics,
mathematics, and engineering—see Figure 18. Vladimir originally attended the Moscow Second Medical
Institute (now called the Russian National Research Medical University) studying Biological Cybernetics,
but eventually became disillusioned with the program, which had too much of a medical emphasis and
imposed requirements to take classes like anatomy and physiology (there were “too many bones with strange
Latin names”). Therefore, he sat the entrance exams a second time and restarted school at the Mekh-Mat
(faculty of mechanics and mathematics) in Moscow State University. In his third year there, he became the
student of Andrey Kolmogorov. This was when the seeds of conformal prediction were first laid. Today,
Vladimir Vovk is widely recognized for being the co-inventor of conformal prediction, along with collaborators
Alexander Gammerman, Vladimir Vapnik, and others, whose contributions we will soon discuss. First, we
will relay some of the historical roots of conformal prediction, along with some oral history related by Vovk
that may be forgotten if never written.
28

Vladimir Vovk

Figure 18: Pages from the 1976 edition of Kvant magazine.

Kolmogorov and Vovk met approximately once a week during his three remaining years as an undergraduate at MSU. At that time, Kolmogorov took an interest in Vovk, and encouraged him to work on difficult
mathematical problems. Ultimately, Vovk settled on studying a topic of interest to Kolmogorov: algorithmically random sequences, then known as collectives, and which were modified into Bernoulli sequences by
Kolmogorov.
Work on collectives began at the turn of the 20th century, with Gustav Fechner’s Kollectivmasslehre [49],
and was developed significantly by von Mises [50], Abraham Wald [51], Alonzo Church [52], and so on. A
long debate ensued among these statisticians as to whether von Mises’ axioms formed a valid foundation for
probability, with Jean Ville being a notable opponent [53]. Although the theory of von Mises’ collectives
is somewhat defunct, the mathematical ideas generated during this time continue to have a broad impact
on statistics, as we will see. More careful historical reviews of the original debate on collectives exist
elsewhere [52, 54–56]. We focus on its connection to the development of conformal prediction.
Kolmogorov’s interest in Bernoulli sequences continued into the 1970s and 1980s, when Vovk was his
student. Vovk recalls that, on the way to the train station, Kolmogorov told him (not in these exact words),
“Look around you; you do not only see infinite sequences. There are finite sequences.”
Feeling that the finite case was practically important, Kolmogorov extended the idea of collectives via
Bernoulli sequences.
Definition 1 (Bernoulli sequence, informal). A deterministic
binary sequence of length n with k 1s is

Bernoulli if it is a “random” element of the set of all nk sequences of the same length and with the same
number of 1s. “Random” is defined as having a Kolmogorov complexity close to the maximum, log nk .
As is typical in the study of random sequences, the underlying object itself is not a sequence of random
variables. Rather, Kolmogorov quantified the “typicality” of a sequence via Kolmogorov complexity: he
asked how long a program we would need to write in order to distinguish it from other sequences in the same
space [57–59]. Vovk’s first work on random sequences modified Kolmogorov’s [60] definition to better reflect
the randomness in an event like a coin toss. Vovk discusses the history of Bernoulli sequences, including the
important work done by Martin-Löf and Levin, in the Appendix of [61]. Learning the theory of Bernoulli
sequences brought Vovk closer to understanding finite-sample exchangeability and its role in prediction
problems.
We will make a last note about the contributions of the early probabilists before moving to the modern
day. The concept of a nonconformity score came from the idea of (local) randomness deficiency. Consider
the sequence
00000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000001.
With a computer, we could write a very short program to identify the ‘1’ in the sequence, since it is atypical
— it has a large randomness deficiency. But to identify any particular ‘0’ in the sequence, we must specify its
29

location, because it is so typical — it has a small randomness deficiency. A heuristic understanding suffices
here, and we defer the formal definition of randomness deficiency to [62], avoiding the notation of Turing
machines and Kolmogorov complexity. When randomness deficiency is large, a point is atypical, just like
the scores we discussed in Section 2. These ideas, along with the existing statistical literature on tolerance
intervals [63–66] and works related to de Finetti’s theorems on exchangeability [67–72] formed the seedcorn
for conformal prediction: the rough notion of collectives eventually became exchangeability, and the idea
of randomness deficiency eventually became nonconformity. Furthermore, the early literature on tolerance
intervals was quite close mathematically to conformal prediction—indeed, the fact that order statistics of
a uniform distribution are Beta distributed was known at the time, and this was used to form prediction
regions in high probability, much like [14]; more on this connection is available in Edgar Dobriban’s lecture
notes [73].

Enter Conformal Prediction
The framework we now call conformal prediction was hatched by Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman,
Craig Saunders, and Vladimir Vapnik in the years 1996-1999, first using e-values [74] and then with pvalues [5, 75]. For decades, Vovk and collaborators developed the theory and applications of conformal
prediction. Key moments include:
• the 2002 proof that in online conformal prediction, the probability of error is independent across
time-steps [76];
• the 2002 development, along with Harris Papadopoulos and Kostas Proedrou, of split-conformal predictors [2];
• Glenn Shafer coins the term “conformal predictor” on December 1, 2003 while writing Algorithmic
Learning in a Random World with Vovk [1].
• the 2003 development of Venn Predictors [77] (Vovk says this idea came to him on a bus in Germany
during the Dagstuhl seminar “Kolmogorov Complexity & Applications”);
• the 2012 founding of the Symposium on Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction and its Applications
(COPA), hosted in Greece by Harris Papadopoulos and colleagues;
• the 2012 creation of cross-conformal predictors [41] and Venn-Abers predictors [78];
• The 2017 invention of conformal predictive distributions [79].
Algorithmic Learning in a Random World [1], by Vovk, Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer, contains further
perspective on the history described above in the bibliography of Chapter 2 and the main text of Chapter
10. Also, the book’s website links to several dozen technical reports on conformal prediction and related
topics. We now help the reader understand some of these key developments.
Conformal prediction was recently popularized in the United States by the pioneering work of Jing
Lei, Larry Wasserman, and colleagues [3, 80–83]. Vovk himself remembers Wasserman’s involvement as a
landmark moment in the history of the field. In particular, their general framework for distribution-free
predictive inference in regression [83] has been a seminal work. They have also, in the special cases of kernel
density estimation and kernel regression, created efficient approximations to full conformal prediction [3,
84]. Jing Lei also created a fast and exact conformalization of the Lasso and elastic net procedures [85].
Another equally important contribution of theirs was to introduce conformal prediction to thousands of
researchers, including the authors of this paper, and also Rina Barber, Emmanuel Candès, Aaditya Ramdas,
Ryan Tibshirani who themselves have made recent fundamental contributions. Some of these we have already
touched upon in Section 2, such as adaptive prediction sets, conformalized quantile regression, covariate-shift
conformal, and the idea of conformal prediction as indexing nested sets [86].
This group also did fundamental work circumscribing the conditions under which distribution-free conditional guarantees can exist [87], building on previous works by Vovk, Lei, and Wasserman that showed for an
30

arbitrary continuous distribution, conditional coverage is impossible [3, 14, 83]. More fine-grained analysis
of this fact has also recently been done in [88], showing that vanishing-width intervals are achievable if and
only if the effective support size of the distribution of Xtest is smaller than the square of the sample size.

Current Trends
We now discuss recent work in conformal prediction and distribution-free uncertainty quantification more
generally, providing pointers to topics we did not discuss in earlier sections. Many of the papers we cite here
would be great starting points for novel research on distribution-free methods.
Many recent papers have focused on designing conformal procedures to have good practical performance
according to specific desiderata like small set sizes [6], coverage that is approximately balanced across regions
of feature space [4, 7, 15, 27, 87, 89], and errors balanced across classes [6, 23, 90, 91]. This usually involves
adjusting the conformal score; we gave many examples of such adjustments in Section 2. Good conformal
scores can also be trained with data to optimize more complicated desiderata [92].
Many statistical extensions to conformal prediction have also emerged. Such extensions include the ideas
of risk control [4, 18] and covariate shift [25] that we previously discussed. One important and continual
area of work is distribution shift, where our test point has a different distribution from our calibration data.
For example, [93] builds a conformal procedure robust to shifts of known f -divergence in the score function,
and adaptive conformal prediction [31] forms prediction sets in a data stream where the distribution varies
over time in an unknown fashion by constantly re-estimating the conformal quantile. A weighted version of
conformal prediction pioneered by [26] provides tools for addressing non-exchangeable data, most notably
slowly changing time-series. This same work develops techniques for applying full conformal prediction
to asymmetric algorithms. Beyond distribution shift, recent statistical extensions also address topics such
as creating reliable conformal prediction intervals for counterfactuals and individual treatment effects [94–
96], covariate-dependent lower bounds on survival times [97], prediction sets that preserve the privacy of
the calibration data [98], handling dependent data [99–101], and achieving ‘multivalid’ coverage that is
conditionally valid with respect to several possibly overlapping groups [102, 103].
Furthermore, prediction sets are not the only important form of distribution-free uncertainty quantification. One alternative form is a conformal predictive distribution, which outputs a probability distribution
over the response space Y in a regression problem [79]. Recent work also addresses the issue of calibrating
a scalar notion of uncertainty to have probabilistic meaning via histogram binning [104, 105]—this is like a
rigorous version of Platt scaling or isotonic regression. The tools from conformal prediction can also be used
to identify times when the distribution of data has changed by examining the score function’s behavior on
new data points. For example, [24] performs outlier detection using conformal prediction, [61, 106] detect
change points in time-series data, [107] tests for covariate shift between two datasets, and [108] tracks the
risk of a predictor on a data-stream to identify when harmful changes in its distribution (one that increases
the risk) occur.
Developing better estimators of uncertainty improves the practical effectiveness of conformal prediction.
The literature on this topic is too wide to even begin discussing; instead, we point to quantile regression as
an example of a fruitful line of work that mingled especially nicely with conformal prediction in Section 2.2.
Quantile regression was first proposed in [9] and extended to the locally polynomial case in [109]. Under
sufficient regularity, quantile regression converges uniformly to the true quantile function [109–113]. Practical
and accessible references for quantile regression have been written by Koenker and collaborators [114, 115].
Active work continues today to analyze the statistical properties of quantile regression and its variants under
different conditions, for example in additive models [116] or to improve conditional coverage when the size of
the intervals may correlate with miscoverage events [16]. The Handbook of Quantile Regression [115] includes
more detail on such topics, and a memoir of quantile regression for the interested reader. Since quantile
regression provides intervals with near-conditional coverage asymptotically, the conformalized version inherits
this good behavior as well.
Along with such statistical advances has come a recent wave of practical applications of conformal prediction. Conformal prediction in large-scale deep learning was studied in [4], focusing on image classification.

31

One compelling use-case of conformal prediction is speeding up and decreasing the computational cost of the
test-time evaluation of complex models [117, 118]. The same researchers pooled information across multiple
tasks in a meta-learning setup to form tight prediction sets for few-shot prediction [119]. There is also an
earlier line of work, appearing slightly after that of Lei and Wasserman, applying conformal prediction to decision trees [120–122]. Closer to end-users, we are aware of several real applications of conformal prediction.
The Washington Post estimated the number of outstanding Democratic and Republican votes in the 2020
United States presidential election using conformal prediction [123]. Early clinical experiments in hospitals
underscore the utility of conformal prediction in that setting as well, although real deployments are still to
come [124, 125]. Fairness and reliability of algorithmic risk forecasts in the criminal justice system improves
(on controlled datasets) when applying conformal prediction [125–127]. Conformal prediction was recently
applied to create safe robotic planning algorithms that avoid bumping into objects [128, 129]. Recently a
scikit-learn compatible open-source library, MAPIE, has been developed for constructing conformal prediction intervals. There remains a mountain of future work in these applications of conformal prediction and
many others.
Today, the field of distribution-free uncertainty quantification remains small, but grows rapidly year-onyear. The promulgation of machine learning deployments has caused a reckoning that point predictions are
not enough and shown that we still need rigorous statistical inference for reliable decision-making. Many
researchers around the world have keyed into this fact and have created new algorithms and software using
distribution-free ideas like conformal prediction. These developments are numerous and high-quality, so
most reviews are out-of-date. To keep track of what gets released, the reader may want to see the Awesome
Conformal Prediction repository [130], which provides a frequently-updated list of resources in this area.
We will end our Gentle Introduction with a personal note to the reader—you can be part of this story
too. The infant field of distribution-free uncertainty quantification has ample room for significant technical
contributions. Furthermore, the concepts are practical and approachable; they can easily be understood
and implemented in code. Thus, we encourage the reader to try their hand at distribution-free uncertainty
quantification; there is a lot more to be done!

References
[1]

V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and G. Shafer, Algorithmic Learning in a Random World. Springer, 2005.

[2]

H. Papadopoulos, K. Proedrou, V. Vovk, and A. Gammerman, “Inductive confidence machines for
regression,” in Machine Learning: European Conference on Machine Learning, 2002, pp. 345–356.

[3]

J. Lei and L. Wasserman, “Distribution-free prediction bands for non-parametric regression,” Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B: Statistical Methodology, pp. 71–96, 2014.

[4]

A. N. Angelopoulos, S. Bates, J. Malik, and M. I. Jordan, “Uncertainty sets for image classifiers using
conformal prediction,” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

[5]

V. Vovk, A. Gammerman, and C. Saunders, “Machine-learning applications of algorithmic randomness,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, 1999, pp. 444–453.

[6]

M. Sadinle, J. Lei, and L. Wasserman, “Least ambiguous set-valued classifiers with bounded error
levels,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 114, pp. 223–234, 2019.

[7]

Y. Romano, M. Sesia, and E. J. Candès, “Classification with valid and adaptive coverage,” arXiv:2006.02544,
2020.

[8]

Y. Romano, E. Patterson, and E. Candès, “Conformalized quantile regression,” in Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 32, 2019, pp. 3543–3553.

[9]

R. Koenker and G. Bassett Jr, “Regression quantiles,” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric
Society, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 33–50, 1978.

[10]

A. N. Angelopoulos, A. P. Kohli, S. Bates, M. I. Jordan, J. Malik, T. Alshaabi, S. Upadhyayula,
and Y. Romano, “Image-to-image regression with distribution-free uncertainty quantification and
applications in imaging,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.05265, 2022.

32

[11]

P. Hoff, “Bayes-optimal prediction with frequentist coverage control,” arXiv:2105.14045, 2021.

[12]

L. Wasserman, “Frasian inference,” Statistical Science, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 322–325, 2011.

[13]

T. Melluish, C. Saunders, I. Nouretdinov, and V. Vovk, “Comparing the bayes and typicalness frameworks,” in European Conference on Machine Learning, Springer, 2001, pp. 360–371.

[14]

V. Vovk, “Conditional validity of inductive conformal predictors,” in Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 25, 2012, pp. 475–490.

[15]

M. Cauchois, S. Gupta, and J. Duchi, “Knowing what you know: Valid and validated confidence sets
in multiclass and multilabel prediction,” arXiv:2004.10181, 2020.

[16]

S. Feldman, S. Bates, and Y. Romano, “Improving conditional coverage via orthogonal quantile
regression,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

[17]

A. N. Angelopoulos, S. Bates, A. Fisch, L. Lei, and T. Schuster, “Conformal risk control,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2208.02814, 2022.

[18]

A. N. Angelopoulos, S. Bates, E. J. Candès, M. I. Jordan, and L. Lei, “Learn then test: Calibrating
predictive algorithms to achieve risk control,” arXiv:2110.01052, 2021.

[19]

M. A. Pimentel, D. A. Clifton, L. Clifton, and L. Tarassenko, “A review of novelty detection,” Signal
Processing, vol. 99, pp. 215–249, 2014.

[20]

R. A. Fisher, “Design of experiments,” British Medical Journal, vol. 1, no. 3923, p. 554, 1936.

[21]

E. J. Pitman, “Significance tests which may be applied to samples from any populations,” Supplement
to the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 119–130, 1937.

[22]

V. Vovk, I. Nouretdinov, and A. Gammerman, “Testing exchangeability on-line,” in Proceedings of
the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-03), 2003, pp. 768–775.

[23]

L. Guan and R. Tibshirani, “Prediction and outlier detection in classification problems,” arXiv:1905.04396,
2019.

[24]

S. Bates, E. Candès, L. Lei, Y. Romano, and M. Sesia, “Testing for outliers with conformal p-values,”
arXiv:2104.08279, 2021.

[25]

R. J. Tibshirani, R. Foygel Barber, E. Candes, and A. Ramdas, “Conformal prediction under covariate
shift,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32, 2019, pp. 2530–2540.

[26]

R. F. Barber, E. J. Candes, A. Ramdas, and R. J. Tibshirani, “Conformal prediction beyond exchangeability,” arXiv:2202.13415, 2022.

[27]

L. Guan, “Conformal prediction with localization,” arXiv:1908.08558, 2020.

[28]

T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan, P. Dollár, and C. L. Zitnick,
“Microsoft coco: Common objects in context,” in European conference on computer vision, Springer,
2014, pp. 740–755.

[29]

A. Malinin, N. Band, G. Chesnokov, Y. Gal, M. J. Gales, A. Noskov, A. Ploskonosov, L. Prokhorenkova,
I. Provilkov, V. Raina, et al., “Shifts: A dataset of real distributional shift across multiple large-scale
tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.07455, 2021.

[30]

A. V. Dorogush, V. Ershov, and A. Gulin, “Catboost: Gradient boosting with categorical features
support,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.11363, 2018.

[31]

I. Gibbs and E. Candès, “Adaptive conformal inference under distribution shift,” arXiv:2106.00170,
2021.

[32]

M. Zaffran, O. Féron, Y. Goude, J. Josse, and A. Dieuleveut, “Adaptive conformal predictions for
time series,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2022, pp. 25 834–25 866.

[33]

I. Gibbs and E. Candès, “Conformal inference for online prediction with arbitrary distribution shifts,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.08401, 2022.

[34]

C. Xu and Y. Xie, “Conformal prediction interval for dynamic time-series,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2021, pp. 11 559–11 569.

33

[35]

L. Hanu and Unitary team, Detoxify, Github. https://github.com/unitaryai/detoxify, 2020.

[36]

J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018.

[37]

P. W. Koh, S. Sagawa, H. Marklund, S. M. Xie, M. Zhang, A. Balsubramani, W. Hu, M. Yasunaga,
R. L. Phillips, I. Gao, et al., “Wilds: A benchmark of in-the-wild distribution shifts,” in International
Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, 2021, pp. 5637–5664.

[38]

G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “A tutorial on conformal prediction,” Journal of Machine Learning Research,
vol. 9, no. Mar, pp. 371–421, 2008.

[39]

E. Ndiaye and I. Takeuchi, “Computing full conformal prediction set with approximate homotopy,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.

[40]

E. Ndiaye and I. Takeuchi, “Root-finding approaches for computing conformal prediction set,” Machine Learning, 2022.

[41]

V. Vovk, “Cross-conformal predictors,” Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 74,
no. 1-2, pp. 9–28, 2015.

[42]

R. F. Barber, E. J. Candes, A. Ramdas, and R. J. Tibshirani, “Predictive inference with the jackknife+,” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 486–507, 2021.

[43]

E. Chung and J. P. Romano, “Exact and asymptotically robust permutation tests,” The Annals of
Statistics, vol. 41, no. 2, pp. 484–507, 2013.

[44]

H. B. Mann and D. R. Whitney, “On a test of whether one of two random variables is stochastically
larger than the other,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 50–60, 1947.

[45]

E. L. Lehmann, “The power of rank tests,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 23–43, 1953.

[46]

Z. Sidak, P. K. Sen, and J. Hajek, Theory of rank tests. Elsevier, 1999.

[47]

B. Efron and R. J. Tibshirani, An introduction to the bootstrap. CRC press, 1994.

[48]

S. Chatterjee and P. Qiu, “Distribution-free cumulative sum control charts using bootstrap-based
control limits,” The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 349–369, 2009.

[49]

G. T. Fechner, Kollektivmasslehre. Engelmann, 1897.

[50]

R. von Mises, “Grundlagen der wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung,” Mathematische Zeitschrift, vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 52–99, 1919.

[51]

A. Wald, “Die widerspruchfreiheit des kollectivbegriffes der wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung,” Ergebnisse
Eines Mathematischen Kolloquiums, vol. 8, no. 38-72, p. 37, 1937.

[52]

A. Church, “On the concept of a random sequence,” Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society,
vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 130–135, 1940.

[53]

J. Ville, “Etude critique de la notion de collectif,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc, vol. 45, no. 11, p. 824,
1939.

[54]

G. Shafer and V. Vovk, “The sources of Kolmogorov’s Grundbegriffe,” Statistical Science, vol. 21,
no. 1, pp. 70–98, 2006.

[55]

V. Vovk, “Kolmogorov’s complexity conception of probability,” Synthese Library, pp. 51–70, 2001.

[56]

C. P. Porter, “Kolmogorov on the role of randomness in probability theory,” Mathematical Structures
in Computer Science, vol. 24, no. 3, 2014.

[57]

A. N. Kolmogorov, “Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information,” Problems of
Information Transmission, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–7, 1965.

[58]

A. Kolmogorov, “Logical basis for information theory and probability theory,” IEEE Transactions
on Information Theory, vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 662–664, 1968.

[59]

A. N. Kolmogorov, “Combinatorial foundations of information theory and the calculus of probabilities,” Russian Mathematical Surveys, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 29–40, 1983.

34

[60]

V. G. Vovk, “On the concept of the Bernoulli property,” Russian Mathematical Surveys, vol. 41, no. 1,
p. 247, 1986.

[61]

V. Vovk, “Testing randomness online,” Statistical Science, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 595–611, 2021.

[62]

F. Mota, S. Aaronson, L. Antunes, and A. Souto, “Sophistication as randomness deficiency,” in
International Workshop on Descriptional Complexity of Formal Systems, Springer, 2013, pp. 172–
181.

[63]

S. S. Wilks, “Determination of sample sizes for setting tolerance limits,” Annals of Mathematical
Statistics, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 91–96, 1941.

[64]

——, “Statistical prediction with special reference to the problem of tolerance limits,” Annals of
Mathematical Statistics, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 400–409, 1942.

[65]

A. Wald, “An extension of Wilks’ method for setting tolerance limits,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 45–55, 1943.

[66]

J. W. Tukey, “Non-parametric estimation II. Statistically equivalent blocks and tolerance regions–the
continuous case,” Annals of Mathematical Statistics, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 529–539, 1947.

[67]

P. Diaconis and D. Freedman, “Finite exchangeable sequences,” The Annals of Probability, pp. 745–
764, 1980.

[68]

D. J. Aldous, “Exchangeability and related topics,” in École d’Été de Probabilités de Saint-Flour
XIII—1983, 1985, pp. 1–198.

[69]

B. De Finetti, “Funzione caratteristica di un fenomeno aleatorio,” in Atti del Congresso Internazionale
dei Matematici: Bologna del 3 al 10 de Settembre di 1928, 1929, pp. 179–190.

[70]

D. A. Freedman, “Bernard Friedman’s urn,” The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, pp. 956–970,
1965.

[71]

E. Hewitt and L. J. Savage, “Symmetric measures on Cartesian products,” Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, vol. 80, no. 2, pp. 470–501, 1955.

[72]

J. F. Kingman, “Uses of exchangeability,” The Annals of Probability, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 183–197, 1978.

[73]

E. Dobriban, Topics in Modern Statistical Learning (STAT 991, UPenn, 2022 Spring), Dec. 2022.

[74]

A. Gammerman, V. Vovk, and V. Vapnik, “Learning by transduction,” Proceedings of the Fourteenth
Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 14, pp. 148–155, 1998.

[75]

C. Saunders, A. Gammerman, and V. Vovk, “Transduction with confidence and credibility,” 1999.

[76]

V. Vovk, “On-line confidence machines are well-calibrated,” in The 43rd Annual IEEE Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, IEEE, 2002, pp. 187–196.

[77]

V. Vovk, G. Shafer, and I. Nouretdinov, “Self-calibrating probability forecasting.,” in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2003, pp. 1133–1140.

[78]

V. Vovk and I. Petej, “Venn-Abers predictors,” arXiv:1211.0025, 2012.

[79]

V. Vovk, J. Shen, V. Manokhin, and M.-g. Xie, “Nonparametric predictive distributions based on
conformal prediction,” Machine Learning, pp. 1–30, 2017.

[80]

J. Lei, J. Robins, and L. Wasserman, “Efficient nonparametric conformal prediction regions,” arXiv:1111.1418,
2011.

[81]

——, “Distribution-free prediction sets,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 108,
no. 501, pp. 278–287, 2013.

[82]

B. Póczos, A. Singh, A. Rinaldo, and L. Wasserman, “Distribution-free distribution regression,” in
Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, PMLR, 2013, pp. 507–515.

[83]

J. Lei, M. G’Sell, A. Rinaldo, R. J. Tibshirani, and L. Wasserman, “Distribution-free predictive
inference for regression,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 113, no. 523, pp. 1094–
1111, 2018.

[84]

J. Lei, A. Rinaldo, and L. Wasserman, “A conformal prediction approach to explore functional data,”
Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 74, pp. 29–43, 2015.
35

[85]

J. Lei, “Fast exact conformalization of the lasso using piecewise linear homotopy,” Biometrika, vol. 106,
no. 4, pp. 749–764, 2019.

[86]

C. Gupta, A. K. Kuchibhotla, and A. Ramdas, “Nested conformal prediction and quantile out-of-bag
ensemble methods,” Pattern Recognition, p. 108 496, 2021.

[87]

R. Foygel Barber, E. J. Candes, A. Ramdas, and R. J. Tibshirani, “The limits of distribution-free
conditional predictive inference,” Information and Inference: A Journal of the IMA, vol. 10, no. 2,
pp. 455–482, 2021.

[88]

Y. Lee and R. F. Barber, “Distribution-free inference for regression: Discrete, continuous, and in
between,” arXiv:2105.14075, 2021.

[89]

R. Izbicki, G. Shimizu, and R. Stern, “Flexible distribution-free conditional predictive bands using
density estimators,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 108, PMLR, 2020, pp. 3068–
3077.

[90]

J. Lei, “Classification with confidence,” Biometrika, vol. 101, no. 4, pp. 755–769, Oct. 2014.

[91]

Y. Hechtlinger, B. Poczos, and L. Wasserman, “Cautious deep learning,” arXiv:1805.09460, 2018.

[92]

D. Stutz, K. D. Dvijotham, A. T. Cemgil, and A. Doucet, “Learning optimal conformal classifiers,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.

[93]

M. Cauchois, S. Gupta, A. Ali, and J. C. Duchi, “Robust validation: Confident predictions even when
distributions shift,” arXiv:2008.04267, 2020.

[94]

L. Lei and E. J. Candès, “Conformal inference of counterfactuals and individual treatment effects,”
arXiv:2006.06138, 2020.

[95]

M. Yin, C. Shi, Y. Wang, and D. M. Blei, “Conformal sensitivity analysis for individual treatment
effects,” arXiv:2112.03493, 2021.

[96]

V. Chernozhukov, K. Wüthrich, and Y. Zhu, “An exact and robust conformal inference method for
counterfactual and synthetic controls,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, pp. 1–16,
2021.

[97]

E. J. Candès, L. Lei, and Z. Ren, “Conformalized survival analysis,” arXiv:2103.09763, 2021.

[98]

A. N. Angelopoulos, S. Bates, T. Zrnic, and M. I. Jordan, “Private prediction sets,” arXiv:2102.06202,
2021.

[99]

V. Chernozhukov, K. Wüthrich, and Z. Yinchu, “Exact and robust conformal inference methods for
predictive machine learning with dependent data,” in Conference On Learning Theory, PMLR, 2018,
pp. 732–749.

[100]

R. Dunn, L. Wasserman, and A. Ramdas, “Distribution-free prediction sets with random effects,”
arXiv:1809.07441, 2018.

[101]

R. I. Oliveira, P. Orenstein, T. Ramos, and J. V. Romano, “Split conformal prediction for dependent
data,” arXiv:2203.15885, 2022.

[102]

O. Bastani, V. Gupta, C. Jung, G. Noarov, R. Ramalingam, and A. Roth, “Practical adversarial
multivalid conformal prediction,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, A. H. Oh,
A. Agarwal, D. Belgrave, and K. Cho, Eds., 2022.

[103]

C. Jung, G. Noarov, R. Ramalingam, and A. Roth, “Batch multivalid conformal prediction,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2209.15145, 2022.

[104]

C. Gupta and A. Ramdas, “Distribution-free calibration guarantees for histogram binning without
sample splitting,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 139, 2021, pp. 3942–3952.

[105]

S. Park, S. Li, O. Bastani, and I. Lee, “PAC confidence predictions for deep neural network classifiers,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

[106]

D. Volkhonskiy, E. Burnaev, I. Nouretdinov, A. Gammerman, and V. Vovk, “Inductive conformal
martingales for change-point detection,” in Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction and Applications,
PMLR, 2017, pp. 132–153.

36

[107]

X. Hu and J. Lei, “A distribution-free test of covariate shift using conformal prediction,” arXiv:2010.07147,
2020.

[108]

A. Podkopaev and A. Ramdas, “Tracking the risk of a deployed model and detecting harmful distribution shifts,” arXiv:2110.06177, 2021.

[109]

P. Chaudhuri, “Global nonparametric estimation of conditional quantile functions and their derivatives,” Journal of Multivariate Analysis, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 246–269, 1991.

[110]

I. Steinwart and A. Christmann, “Estimating conditional quantiles with the help of the pinball loss,”
Bernoulli, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 211–225, 2011.

[111]

I. Takeuchi, Q. V. Le, T. D. Sears, and A. J. Smola, “Nonparametric quantile estimation,” Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 7, pp. 1231–1264, 2006.

[112]

K. Q. Zhou, S. L. Portnoy, et al., “Direct use of regression quantiles to construct confidence sets in
linear models,” The Annals of Statistics, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 287–306, 1996.

[113]

K. Q. Zhou and S. L. Portnoy, “Statistical inference on heteroscedastic models based on regression
quantiles,” Journal of Nonparametric Statistics, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 239–260, 1998.

[114]

R. Koenker, Quantile Regression. Cambridge University Press, 2005.

[115]

R. Koenker, V. Chernozhukov, X. He, and L. Peng, “Handbook of quantile regression,” 2018.

[116]

R. Koenker, “Additive models for quantile regression: Model selection and confidence bandaids,”
Brazilian Journal of Probability and Statistics, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 239–262, 2011.

[117]

A. Fisch, T. Schuster, T. S. Jaakkola, and R. Barzilay, “Efficient conformal prediction via cascaded
inference with expanded admission,” in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.

[118]

T. Schuster, A. Fisch, T. Jaakkola, and R. Barzilay, “Consistent accelerated inference via confident
adaptive transformers,” Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2021.

[119]

A. Fisch, T. Schuster, T. Jaakkola, and D. Barzilay, “Few-shot conformal prediction with auxiliary
tasks,” in International Conference on Machine Learning, vol. 139, 2021, pp. 3329–3339.

[120]

U. Johansson, H. Boström, T. Löfström, and H. Linusson, “Regression conformal prediction with
random forests,” Machine learning, vol. 97, no. 1, pp. 155–176, 2014.

[121]

H. Linusson, U. Norinder, H. Boström, U. Johansson, and T. Löfström, “On the calibration of aggregated conformal predictors,” in Conformal and probabilistic prediction and applications, PMLR,
2017, pp. 154–173.

[122]

H. Boström, H. Linusson, T. Löfström, and U. Johansson, “Accelerating difficulty estimation for
conformal regression forests,” Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence, vol. 81, no. 1, pp. 125–
144, 2017.

[123]

J. Cherian and L. Bronner, “How the Washington Post estimates outstanding votes for the 2020 presidential election,” Washington Post, 2021, https://s3.us-east-1.amazonaws.com/elex-models-prod/2020general/write-up/election model writeup.pdf.

[124]

C. Lu and J. Kalpathy-Cramer, “Distribution-free federated learning with conformal predictions,”
arXiv:2110.07661, 2021.

[125]

C. Lu, A. Lemay, K. Chang, K. Hoebel, and J. Kalpathy-Cramer, “Fair conformal predictors for
applications in medical imaging,” arXiv:2109.04392, 2021.

[126]

Y. Romano, R. F. Barber, C. Sabatti, and E. Candès, “With malice toward none: Assessing uncertainty
via equalized coverage,” Harvard Data Science Review, vol. 2, no. 2, Apr. 30, 2020.

[127]

A. K. Kuchibhotla and R. A. Berk, “Nested conformal prediction sets for classification with applications to probation data,” arXiv:2104.09358, 2021.

[128]

L. Lindemann, M. Cleaveland, G. Shim, and G. J. Pappas, “Safe planning in dynamic environments
using conformal prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.10254, 2022.

[129]

A. Dixit, L. Lindemann, M. Cleaveland, S. Wei, G. J. Pappas, and J. W. Burdick, “Adaptive conformal
prediction for motion planning among dynamic agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00278, 2022.
37

[130]

V. Manokhin, Awesome Conformal Prediction, version v1.0.0, Apr. 2022.

[131]

S. Bates, A. Angelopoulos, L. Lei, J. Malik, and M. Jordan, “Distribution-free, risk-controlling prediction sets,” Journal of the Association for Computing Machinery, vol. 68, no. 6, Sep. 2021.

[132]

F. Bretz, W. Maurer, W. Brannath, and M. Posch, “A graphical approach to sequentially rejective
multiple test procedures,” Statistics in Medicine, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 586–604, 2009.

38

Figure 19: Object detection with simultaneous distribution-free guarantees on the expected
intersection-over-union, recall, and coverage rate.

A

Distribution-Free Control of General Risks

For many prediction tasks, the relevant notion of reliability is not coverage. Indeed, many applications
have problem-specific performance metrics—from false-discovery rate to fairness—that directly encode the
soundness of a prediction. In Section 4.3, we saw how to control the expectation of monotone loss functions using conformal risk control. Here, we generalize further to control any risk and multiple risks in a
distribution-free way without retraining the model. As an example, in instance segmentation, we are given
an image and asked to identify all objects in the image, segment them, and classify them. All three of these
sub-tasks have their own risks: recall, intersection-over-union (IOU), and coverage respectively. These risks
can be automatically controlled using distribution-free statistics, as we preview in Figure 19.
We first re-introduce the theory of risk control below, then give a list of illustrative examples. As in
conformal risk control, we start with a pretrained model fˆ. The model also has a parameter λ, which we are
free to choose. We use fˆ(x) and λ to form our prediction, Tλ (x), which may be a set or some other object.
For example, when performing regression, λ could threshold the estimated probability density, as below.

We then define a notion of risk R(λ). The risk function measures the quality of Tλ according to the user.
The goal of risk control is to use our calibration set to pick a parameter λ̂ so that the risk is small with high
probability. In formal terms, for a user-defined risk tolerance α and error rate δ, we seek to ensure



P R λ̂ < α ≥ 1 − δ,
(17)
where the probability is taken over the calibration data used to pick λ̂. Note that this guarantee is highprobability, unlike that in Section 4.3, which is in expectation. We will soon introduce a distribution-free
technique called Learn then Test (LTT) for finding λ̂ that satisfy (17). Below we include two example
applications of risk control which would be impossible with conformal prediction and conformal risk control.
• Multi-label Classification with FDR Control: In this setting, Xtest is an image and Ytest is a subset
of K classes contained in the image. Our model fˆ gives us the probability each of the K classes is
contained in the image. We will include a class in our estimate of y if fˆk > λ — i.e., the parameter
39

λ thresholds the estimated probabilities. We seek to find the λ̂s that guarantees our predicted set of
labels is sufficiently reliable as measured by the false-discovery rate (FDR) risk R(λ̂).
• Simultaneous Guarantees on OOD Detection and Coverage: For each input Xtest with true class Ytest ,
we want to decide if it is out-of-distribution. If so, we will flag it as such. Otherwise, we want to output
a prediction set that contains the true class with 90% probability. In this case, we have two models:
OOD(x), which tells us how OOD the input is, and fˆ(x), which gives the estimated probability that
the input comes from each of K classes. In this case, λ has two coordinates, and we also have two
risks. The first coordinate λ1 tells us where to threshold OOD(x) such that the fraction of false alarms
R1 is controlled. The second coordinate λ2 tells us how many classes to include in the prediction set
to control the miscoverage R2 among points identified as in-distribution. We will find λ̂s that control
both R1 (λ̂) and R2 (λ̂) jointly.
We will describe each of these examples in detail in Section B. Many more worked examples, including
the object detection example in Figure 19, are available in the cited literature on risk control [18, 131]. First,
however, we will introduce the general method of risk control via Learn then Test.

A.1

Instructions for Learn then Test

First, we will describe the formal setting of risk control. We introduce notation and the risk-control property
in Definition 2. Then, we describe the calibration algorithm.

Formal notation for error control
Let (Xi , Yi )i=1,...,n be an independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) set of variables, where the features
Xi take values in X and the responses Yi take values in Y. The researcher starts with a pre-trained predictive
model fˆ. We show how to subsequently create predictors from fˆ that control a risk, regardless of the quality
of the initial model fit or the distribution of the data.
Next, let Tλ : X → Y 0 be a function with parameter λ that maps a feature to a prediction (Y 0 can be
any space, including the space of responses Y or prediction sets 2Y ). This function Tλ would typically be
constructed from the predictive model, fˆ, as in our earlier regression example. We further assume λ takes
values in a (possibly multidimensional) discrete set Λ. If Λ is not naturally discrete, we usually discretize it
finely. For example, Λ could be the set {0, 0.001, 0.002, ..., 0.999, 1}.
We then allow the user to choose a risk for the predictor Tλ . This risk can be any function of Tλ , but
often we take the risk function to be the expected value of a loss function,



(18)
R(Tλ ) = E L Tλ (Xtest ), Ytest  .
{z
}
|
Loss function

The loss function is a deterministic function that is high when Tλ (Xtest ) does badly at predicting Ytest . The
risk then averages this loss over the distribution of (Xtest , Ytest ). For example, taking


Rmiscoverage Tλ ) = E 1 {Ytest ∈
/ Tλ (Xtest )} = P (Ytest ∈
/ Tλ (Xtest ))
gives us the familiar case of controlling miscoverage.
To aid the reader, we point out some facts about (18) that may not be obvious. The input Tλ to the risk
is a function; this makes the risk a functional (a function of a function). When we plug Tλ into the risk,
we take an expectation of the loss over the randomness in a single test point. At the end of the process, for
a deterministic λ, we get a deterministic scalar R(Tλ ). Henceforth, for ease of notation, we abbreviate this
number as R(λ) := R(Tλ ).
Our goal is control the risk in the following sense:
40

Definition 2 (Risk control). Let λ̂ be a random variable taking values in Λ (i.e., the output of an algorithm
run on the calibration data). We say that Tλ̂ is a (α, δ)-risk-controlling prediction (RCP) if, with probability

at least 1 − δ, we have R λ̂ ≤ α.
In Definition 2, we plug in a random parameter λ̂ which is chosen based on our calibration data; therefore,
R(λ̂) is random even though the risk is a deterministic function. The high-probability portion of Definition 2
therefore says that λ̂ can only violate risk control if we choose a bad calibration set; this happens with
probability at most δ. The distribution of the risk over many resamplings of the calibration data should
therefore look as below.

#

α
δ
risk

41

The Learn then Test procedure
Recalling Definition 2, our goal is to find a set function whose risk is less than some user-specified threshold
α. To do this, we search across the collection of functions {Tλ }λ∈Λ and estimate their risk on the calibration
data (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xn , Yn ). The output of the procedure will be a set of λ values which are all guaranteed
b ⊆ Λ. The Learn then Test procedure is outlined below.
to control the risk, Λ
1. For each λ ∈ Λ, associate the null hypothesis Hλ : R(λ) > α. Notice that rejecting the Hλ means you
selected λ as a point where the risk is controlled. Here we denote each null with a blue dot; the yellow
dot is highlighted, so we can keep track of it as we explain the procedure.
0.38 : R(0.38) >

0.0

0.5

1.0

2. For each null hypothesis, compute a p-value using a concentration inequality. For example, Hoeffding’s
n
P
2
b
b
L(Tλ (Xi ), Yi ). We remind the reader what a
inequality yields pλ = e−2n(α−R(λ))+ , where R(λ)
= 1
n

i=1

1.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

p

R( )

p-value is, why it is relevant to risk control, and point to references with stronger p-values in A.1.1.

0.38 : R(0.38) >

0.0
0.0

0.38 : R(0.38) >

0.5

0.0
0.0

1.0

0.5

/N
1.0


b = A {pλ }λ∈Λ , where A is an algorithm that controls the familywise-error rate (FWER).
3. Return Λ

b = λ : pλ < δ . We define the FWER and preview
For example, the Bonferroni correction yields Λ
|Λ|
ways to design good FWER-controlling procedures in Section A.1.2. The nulls with red crosses through
them below have been rejected by the procedure; i.e., they all control the risk with high probability.

0.0

0.5

1.0

By following the above procedure, we get the statistical guarantee in Theorem A.1.
b returned by the Learn then Test procedure satisfies
Theorem A.1. The Λ
!
P sup{R(λ̂)} ≤ α

≥ 1 − δ.

b
λ̂∈Λ

b T is an (α, δ)-RCP.
Thus, selecting any λ̂ ∈ Λ,
λ̂
The LTT procedure decomposes risk control into two subproblems: computing p-values and combining
them with multiple testing. We will now take a closer look at each of these subproblems.
42

# Implementation of LTT. Assume access to X, Y where n=X.shape[0]=Y.shape[0]
lambdas = torch.linspace(0,1,N) # Commonly choose N=1000
losses = torch.zeros((n,N)) # Compute the loss function next
for (i,j) in [(i,j) for i in range(n) for j in range(N)]:
prediction_set = T(X[i],lambdas[j]) # T ( ) is problem depemdent
losses[i,j] = get_loss(prediction_set,Y[i]) # Loss is problem dependent
risk = losses.mean(dim=0)
pvals = torch.exp(-2*n*(torch.relu(alpha-risk)**2)) # Or any p-value
lambda_hat = lambdas[pvals<delta/lambdas.shape[0]] # Or any FWER-controlling algorithm

Figure 20: PyTorch code for running Learn then Test.
A.1.1

Crash Course on Generating p-values

What is a p-value, and why is it related to risk control? In Step 1 of the LTT procedure, we
associated a null hypothesis Hλ to every λ ∈ Λ. When the null hypothesis at λ holds, the risk is not
controlled for that value of the parameter. In this reframing, our task is to automatically identify points λ
where the null hypothesis does not hold—i.e., to reject the null hypotheses for some subset of λ such that
R(λ) ≤ α. The process of accepting or rejecting a null hypothesis is called hypothesis testing.

Rejecting the null hypothesis Hλ → the risk is controlled at λ.
Accepting the null hypothesis Hλ → the risk is not controlled at λ.
In order to reject a null hypothesis, we need to have empirical evidence that at λ, the risk is controlled.
We use our calibration data to summarize this information in the form of a p-value pλ . A p-value must
satisfy the following condition, which we sometimes refer to as validity or super-uniformity,
∀t ∈ [0, 1], PHλ (pλ ≤ t) ≤ t,
where PHλ refers to the probability under the null hypothesis. Parsing the super-uniformity condition
carefully tells us that when pλ is low, there is evidence against the null hypothesis Hλ . In other words, for
a particular λ, we can reject Hλ if pλ < 5% and expect to be wrong no more than 5% of the time. This
process is called testing the hypothesis at level δ, where in the previous sentence, δ = 5%.

PDFs of p-values

CDFs of p-values

1.0

uniform p-value
super-uniform p-value

0.5

0.0

0.5

0.0

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

One of the key ingredients in Learn then Test is a p-value with distribution-free validity: it is valid under
without assumptions on the data distribution. For example, when working with risk functions that take
values in [0, 1]—like coverage, IOU, FDR, and so on—the easiest choice of p-value is based on Hoeffding’s
inequality:

pHoeffding
=e
λ

b
−2n α−R(λ)

43

2

+

.

More powerful p-values based on tighter concentration bounds are included in [18]. In particular, many of
the practical examples in that reference use a stronger p-value called the Hoeffding-Bentkus (HB) p-value,

l
m 
b
b
pHB
=
min
exp{−nh
(
R(λ)
∧
α,
α)},
eP
Bin(n,
α)
≤
n
R(λ)
,
1
λ


a
1−a
+ (1 − a) log
where h1 (a, b) = a log
.
b
1−b
Note that any valid p-value will work—it is fine for the reader to keep pHoeffding
in mind for the rest of this
λ
manuscript, with the understanding that more powerful choices are available.
A.1.2

Crash Course on Familywise-Error Rate Algorithms

If we only had one hypothesis Hλ , we could simply test it at level δ. However, we have one hypothesis
for each λ ∈ Λ, where |Λ| is often very large (in the millions or more). This causes a problem: the more
hypotheses we test, the higher chance we incorrectly reject at least one hypothesis. We can formally reason
about this with the familywise-error rate (FWER).
Definition 3 (familywise-error rate). The familywise-error rate of a procedure returning Λ̂ is the probability
of making at least one false rejection, i.e.,
 


b = P ∃λ̂ ∈ Λ
b : R(λ̂) > α .
FWER Λ
As a simple example to show how naively thresholding the p-values at level δ fails to control FWER,
consider the case where all the hypotheses are null, and we have uniform p-values independently tested at
level δ. The FWER then approaches 1; see below.
b = {λ : pλ < δ}, then FWER(Λ)
b = 1 − (1 − δ)|Λ| .
If we take Λ
This simple toy analysis exposes a deeper problem: without an intelligent strategy for combining the information from many p-values together, we can end up making false rejections with high probability. Our
challenge is to intelligently combine the p-values to avoid this issue of multiplicity (without assuming the
p-values are independent).
This fundamental statistical challenge has led to a decades-long and continually rich area of research
called multiple hypothesis testing. In particular, a genre of algorithms called FWER-controlling algorithms
b that guarantees FWER(Λ)
b ≤ δ. The simplest FWER-controlling algorithm
seek to select the largest set of Λ
is the Bonferroni correction,


b Bonferroni = λ ∈ Λ : pλ ≤ δ .
Λ
|Λ|
Under the hood, the Bonferroni correction simply tests each hypothesis at level δ/|Λ|, so the probability
there exists a failed test is no more than δ by a union bound. It should not be surprising that there exist
improvements on Bonferroni correction.
First, we will discuss one important improvement in the case of a monotone loss function: fixed-sequence
testing. As the name suggests, in fixed-sequence testing, we construct a sequence of hypotheses {Hλj }N
j=1
where N = |Λ|, before looking at our calibration data. Usually, we just sort our hypotheses from most- to
least-promising based on information we knew a-priori. For example, if large values of λ are more likely to
control the risk, {λj }N
j=1 just sorts Λ from greatest to least. Then, we test the hypotheses sequentially in
b as we go, and stopping when we make our first acceptance:
some fixed order at level δ, including them in Λ

b FST = {λj , j ≤ T }, where T = max t ∈ {1, ..., N } : pλ 0 ≤ δ, for all t0 ≤ t .
Λ
t

44

person
backpack
handbag
suitcase
suitcase
chair
chair
handbag
dining table
potted plant

zebra

car
parking meter

bicycle
car
bench
dog
dining table

person
bicycle
car
car
skateboard
skateboard
bicycle
bench

potted plant
cup
potted table
dining
plant
dining table
vase
cup
vase

train
clock

person
horse
carrot
car

giraffe

vase plant
potted
potted plant
vase

Figure 22: Examples of multi-label classification with FDR control on the MS-COCO dataset.
Black classes are true positives, blue classes are spurious, and red classes are missed. The FDR is controlled
at level α = 0.1, δ = 0.1.

step

p-value
.01 .01 .02 .03 .04 .04 .05 .06 .06 .09
1
2
T

λ1 λ2 λ3 λ4 λ5 λ6 λ7 λ8 λ9 λ10

Figure 21: An example of fixed-sequence testing with δ = 0.05. Each blue circle represents a null,
and each row a step of the procedure. The nulls with a red cross have been rejected at that step.
This sequential procedure, despite testing all hypotheses it encounters at level δ, still controls the FWER.
For monotone and near-monotone risks, such as the false-discovery rate, it works quite well.
It is also possible to extend the basic idea of fixed-sequence testing to non-monotone functions, creating
powerful and flexible FWER-controlling procedures using an idea called sequential graphical testing [132].
Good graphical FWER-controlling procedures can be designed to have high power for particular problems,
or alternatively, automatically discovered using data. This topic is given a detailed treatment in [18], and
we omit it here for simplicity.
We have described a general-purpose pipeline for distribution-free risk control. It is described in PyTorch
code in Figure 20. Once the user sets up the problem (i.e., picks Λ, Tλ , and R), the LTT pipeline we described
b We now go through three worked examples which teach the reader how to
above automatically produces Λ.
choose Λ, T and R in practical circumstances.

B

Examples of Distribution-Free Risk Control

In this section, we will walk through several examples of distribution-free risk control applied to practical
machine learning problems. The goal is again to arm the reader with an arsenal of pragmatic prototypes of
distribution-free risk control that work on real problems.

45

B.1

Multi-label Classification with FDR Control

We begin our sequence of examples with a familiar and fundamental setup: multi-label classification. Here,
the features Xtest can be anything (e.g. an image), and the label Ytest ⊆ {1, ..., K} must be a set of classes
(e.g. those contained in the image Xtest ). We have a pre-trained machine learning model fˆ(x), which gives
us an estimated probability fˆ(x)k that class k is in the corresponding set-valued label. We will use these
probabilities to include the estimated most likely classes in our prediction set,

Tλ (x) = k : fˆ(x)k > λ , λ ∈ Λ
where Λ = {0, 0.001, ..., 1} (a discretization of [0, 1]). However, one question remains: how do we choose λ?
LTT will allow us to identify values of λ that satisfy a precise probabilistic guarantee—in this case, a
bound on the false-discovery rate (FDR),



|Ytest ∩ Tλ (Xtest )| 


RFDR (λ) = E 1 −
.
|Tλ (Xtest )|


|
{z
}
LFDP (Tλ (Xtest ),Ytest )

As annotated in the underbrace, the FDR is the expectation of a loss function, the false-discovery proportion
(FDP). The FDP is low when our prediction set Tλ (Xtest ) contains mostly elements from Ytest . In this sense,
the FDR measures the quality of our prediction set: if we have a low FDR, it means most of the elements
in our prediction set are good. By setting α = 0.1 and δ = 0.1, we desire that
h
i
P RFDR (λ̂) > 0.1 < 0.1,
where the probability is over the randomness in the calibration set used to pick λ̂.
# model is a multi-class neural network, X.shape[0]=Y.shape[0]=n
lambdas = torch.linspace(0,1,N) # N can be taken to infinity without penalty
losses = torch.zeros((n,N)) # loss for example i with parameter lambdas[j]
for i in range(n): # In reality we parallelize these loops massively
sigmoids = model(X[i].unsqueeze(0)).sigmoid().squeeze() # Care with dims
for j in range(N):
T = sigmoids > lambdas[j] # This is the prediction set
set_size = T.float().sum()
if set_size != 0:
losses[i,j] = 1 - (T[Y] == True).float().sum()/set_size
risk = losses.mean(dim=0)
pvals = torch.exp(-2*n*(torch.relu(alpha-risk)**2)) # Or the HB p-value
# Fixed-sequence test starting at lambdas[-1] and ending at lambdas[0]
below_delta = (pvals <= delta).float()
valid = torch.tensor([(below_delta[j:].mean() == 1) for j in range(N)])
lambda_hat = lambdas[valid]

Figure 23: PyTorch code for performing FDR control with LTT.
Now that we have set up our problem, we can just run the LTT procedure via the code in Figure 23. We
use fixed-sequence testing because the FDR is a nearly monotone risk. In practice, we also wish to use the
HB p-value, which is stronger than the simple Hoeffding p-value in Figure 23. The result of this procedure
on the MS-COCO image dataset is in Figure 22.

B.2

Simultaneous Guarantees on OOD Detection and Coverage

In our next example, we perform classification with two goals:
46

1. Flag out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs without too many false flags.
2. If an input is deemed in-distribution (In-D), output a prediction set that contains the true class with
high probability.
Part of the purpose of this example is to teach the reader how to deal with multiple risk functions (one of
which is a conditional risk) and a multi-dimensional parameter λ.
Our setup requires two different models. The first, OOD(x), outputs a scalar that should be larger when
the input is OOD. The second, fˆ(x)y , estimates the probability that input x is of class y; for example,
fˆ(x) could represent the softmax outputs of a neural net. Similarly, the construction of Tλ (x) has two
substeps, each of which uses a different model. In our first substep, when OOD(x) becomes sufficiently large,
exceeding λ1 , we flag the example as OOD by outputting ∅. Otherwise, we essentially use the APS method
from Section 2.1 to form prediction sets. We precisely describe this procedure below:
(
∅
OOD(x) > λ1
Tλ (x) =
{π1 (x), ..., πK (x)} else,
where K = inf{k :

k
P
fˆ(x)πj (x) > λ2 } and π(x) sorts fˆ(x) from greatest to least. We usually take Λ =
j=1

{0, 1/N, 2/N, ..., 1}2 , i.e., we discretize the box [0, 1] × [0, 1] into N 2 smaller boxes, with N ≈ 1000. The
intuition of Tλ (x) is very simple. If the example is sufficiently atypical, we give up. Otherwise, we create a
prediction set using a procedure similar to (but not identical to) conformal prediction.

O
"I've never seen
anything like this before!"

yes
OOD?
no

{squirrel, chipmunk{
"I'm 90% certain this is
a squirrel or a chipmunk."

Along the same lines, we control two risk functions simultaneously,

R1 (λ) = P (Tλ (Xtest ) = ∅) and R2 (λ) = P Ytest ∈
/ Tλ (Xtest ) Tλ (Xtest ) 6= ∅ .
The first risk function R1 is the probability of a false flag, and the second risk function R2 is the coverage
conditionally on being deemed in-distribution. The user must define risk-tolerances for each, so α is a twovector, where α1 determines the desired fraction of false flags and α2 determines the desired miscoverage
rate. Setting α = (0.05, 0.1) will guarantee that we falsely throw out no more than 5% of in-distribution data
points, and also that among the data points we claim are in-distribution, we will output a prediction set
containing the correct class with 90% probability. In order to control both risks, we now need to associate
a composite null hypothesis to each λ ∈ Λ. Namely, we choose
(1)

(2)

Hλ : Hλ or Hλ ,
where Hλ is the union of two intermediate null hypotheses,
(1)

(2)

Hλ : R1 (λ) > α1 and Hλ : R2 (λ) > α2 .
We summarize our setup in the below table.
47

# ood is an OOD detector, model is classifier with softmax output
lambda1s = torch.linspace(0,1,N) # Usually N ~= 1000
lambda2s = torch.linspace(0,1,N)
losses = torch.zeros((2,n,N,N)) # 2 losses, n data points, N x N lambdas
# The following loop can be massively parallelized (and GPU accelerated)
for (i,j,k) in [(i,j,k) for i in range(n) for j in range(N) for k in range(N)]:
softmaxes = model(X[i].unsqueeze(0)).softmax(1).squeeze() # Care with dims
cumsum = softmaxes.sort(descending=True)[0].cumsum(0)[Y[i]]
if odd(X) > lambda1s[j]:
losses[0,i,j,k] = 1
continue
losses[1,i,j,k] = int(cumsum > lambda2s[k])
risks = losses.mean(dim=1) # 2 x N x N
risks[1] = risks[1] - alpha2*risks[0]
pval1s = torch.exp(-2*n*(torch.relu(alpha1-risks[0])**2)) # Or HB p-value
pval2s = torch.exp(-2*n*(torch.relu(alpha2-risks[1])**2)) # Ditto
pvals = torch.maximum(pval1s,pval2s)
# Bonferroni can be replaced by sequential graphical test as in LTT paper
valid = torch.where(pvals <= delta/(N*N))
lambda_hat = [lambda1s[valid[0]], lambda2s[valid[1]]]

Figure 24: PyTorch code for simultaneously controlling the type-1 error of OOD detection and
prediction set coverage.
Goal
Do not incorrectly label too many images as OOD.
Return a set of labels guaranteed to contain the true one.

Null hypothesis
(1)
Hλ : R1 (λ) > α1
(2)
Hλ : R2 (λ) > α2

Parameter
λ1
λ2

Having completed our setup, we can now apply LTT. The presence of multiple risks creates some wrinkles,
which we will now iron out with the reader. The null hypothesis Hλ has a different structure than the ones
we saw before, but we can use the same tools to test it. To start, we produce p-values for the intermediate
nulls,


(1)

b1 (λ)
−2n α1 −R

pλ = e

2

+

(2)

b2 (λ)
−2n α2 −R

and pλ = e

2

+

,

where
n
n
X
1X
b1 (λ) = 1
1 {Tλ (Xi ) = ∅} and Rb2 (λ) =
1 {Yi ∈/ Tλ (Xi ), Tλ (Xi ) 6= ∅} − α2 1 {Tλ (Xi ) = ∅} .2
R
n i=1
n i=1

Since the maximum of two p-values is also a p-value (you can check this manually by verifying its superuniformity), we can form the p-value for our union null as


(1) (2)
pλ = max pλ , pλ .
In practice, as before, we use the p-values from the HB inequality as opposed to those from Hoeffding. Then,
instead of Bonferroni correction, we combine them with a less conservative form of sequential graphical
testing; see [18] for these more mathematical details. For the purposes of this development, it suffices to
return the Bonferroni region,


b = λ : pλ ≤ δ .
Λ
|Λ|
b controls both risks simultaneously. See Figure 24 for a PyTorch implementation
Then, every element of Λ
of this procedure.
2 The second empirical risk, R
b2 , looks different from a standard empirical risk because of the conditioning. In other words,
not all of our calibration data points have nonempty prediction sets; see Section 4 of [18] to learn more about this point.

48

C

Concentration Properties of the Empirical Coverage

We adopt the same notation as Section 3.
The variation in C has three components. First, n is finite. We analyzed how this leads to fluctuations
in the coverage in Section 3.2. The second source of fluctuations is the finiteness of nval , the size of the
validation set. A small number of validation points can result in a high-variance estimate of the coverage.
This makes the histogram of the Cj wider than the beta distribution above. However, as we will now show,
Cj has an analytical distribution that allows us to exactly understand the histogram’s expected properties.
We now examine the distribution of Cj . Because Cj is an average of indicator functions, it looks like
it is a binomially distributed random variable. This is true conditionally on the calibration data, but not
marginally.
This is because
the mean of the binomial is beta distributed; as we showed in the above analysis,


E Cj {(Xi,j , Yi,j )}ni=1 ∼ Beta(n + 1 − l, l), where (Xi,j , Yi,j ) is the ith calibration point in the jth trial.
Conveniently, binomial random variables with beta-distributed mean,
Cj ∼

1
Binom(nval , µ) where µ ∼ Beta(n + 1 − l, l),
nval

are called beta-binomial random variables. We refer to this distribution as BetaBinom(nval , n + 1 − l, l); its
properties, such as moments and probability mass function, can be found in standard references.
Knowing the analytic form of the Cj allows us to directly plot its distribution. After a sufficient number of
trials R, the histogram of Cj should converge almost exactly to its analytical PMF (which is only a function
of α, n, and nval ). The plot in Figure 25 shows how the histograms should look with different values of nval
and large R. Code for producing these plots is also available in the aforementioned Jupyter notebook.

Distribution of coverage with nval validation points (n = 1000)
nval=100
nval=1000
nval=10000
nval=100000
1

0.75

0.80

0.85

0.90

0.95

1.00

Figure 25: The distribution of empirical coverage converges to the Beta distribution in Figure 11 as
nval grows. However, for small values of nval , the histogram can have an inflated variance.
The final source of fluctuations is due to the finite number of experiments, R. We have now shown that
the Cj are independent beta-binomial random variables. Unfortunately, the distribution of C—the mean of
R independent beta-binomial random variables—does not have a closed form. However, we can simulate the
distribution easily, and we visualize it for several realistic choices of R, nval , and n in Figure 26.

49

Distribution of C with n = 1000, nval = 1000

Distribution of C with n = 10000, nval = 10000
R = 100
R = 1000
R = 10000

0.896

0.898

0.900

0.902

0.904

0.896

0.898

0.900

0.902

0.904

Figure 26: The distribution of average empirical coverage over R trials with n calibration points
and nval validation points.
Furthermore, we can analytically reason about the tail properties of C. Since C is the average of R i.i.d.
beta-binomial random variables, its mean and standard deviation are
s
!
r
 
 
l
l(n + 1 − l)(n + nval + 1)
1
E C =1−
Var C =
.
and
=O p
n+1
nval R(n + 1)2 (n + 2)
R min(n, nval )
The best way for a practitioner to carefully debug their procedure is to compute C empirically, and then
cross-reference with Figure 26. We give code to simulate histograms with any n, R, and nval in the linked
notebook of Figure 26. If the simulated average empirical coverage does not align well with the coverage
observed on the real data, there is likely a problem in the conformal implementation.

D

Theorem and Proof: Coverage Property of Conformal Prediction

This is a standard proof of validity for split-conformal prediction first appearing in [2], but we reproduce it
here for completeness. Let us begin with the lower bound.
Theorem D.1 (Conformal calibration coverage guarantee). Suppose (Xi , Yi )i=1,...,n and (Xtest , Ytest ) are
i.i.d. Then define q̂ as


|{i : s(Xi , Yi ) ≤ q}|
d(n + 1)(1 − α)e
q̂ = inf q :
≥
.
n
n
and the resulting prediction sets as
C(X) = {y : s(X, y) ≤ q̂} .
Then,


P Ytest ∈ C(Xtest ) ≥ 1 − α.
This is the same coverage property as (1) in the introduction, but written more formally. As a technical
remark, the theorem also holds if the observations to satisfy the weaker condition of exchangeability; see [1].
Below, we prove the lower bound.
Proof of Theorem 1. Let si = s(Xi , Yi ) for i = 1, . . . , n and stest = s(Xtest , Ytest ). To avoid handling ties, we
consider the case where the si are distinct with probability 1. See [25] for a proof in the general case.
50

Without loss of generality we assume the calibration scores are sorted so that s1 < · · · < sn . In this
1
case, we have that q̂ = sd(n+1)(1−α)e when α ≥ n+1
and q̂ = ∞ otherwise. Note that in the case q̂ = ∞,
C(Xtest ) = Y, so the coverage property is trivially satisfied; thus, we only have to handle the case when
1
. We proceed by noticing the equality of the two events
α ≥ n+1
{Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )} = {stest ≤ q̂}.
Combining this with the definition of q̂ yields
{Ytest ∈ C(Xtest )} = {stest ≤ sd(n+1)(1−α)e }.
Now comes the crucial insight. By exchangeability of the variables (X1 , Y1 ), . . . , (Xtest , Ytest ), we have
P (stest ≤ sk ) =

k
n+1

for any integer k. In words, stest is equally likely to fall in anywhere between the calibration points s1 , . . . , sn .
Note that above, the randomness is over all variables s1 , . . . , sn , stest
From here, we conclude
P (stest ≤ sd(n+1)(1−α))e ) =

d(n + 1)(1 − α)e
≥ 1 − α,
(n + 1)

which implies the desired result.
Now we will discuss the upper bound. Technically, the upper bound only holds when the distribution
of the conformal score is continuous, avoiding ties. In practice, however, this condition is not important,
because the user can always add a vanishing amount of random noise to the score. We will state the theorem
now, and defer its proof.
Theorem D.2 (Conformal calibration upper bound). Additionally, if the scores s1 , ..., sn have a continuous
joint distribution, then


1
P Ytest ∈ C(Xtest , Utest , q̂) ≤ 1 − α +
.
n+1
Proof. See Theorem 2.2 of [83].

51

