Artificial Intelligence and Law
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-025-09456-8
ORIGINAL RESEARCH

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts
Alan Khoja2 · Martin Kölbl1 · Stefan Leue1

· Rüdiger Wilhelmi2

Accepted: 3 April 2025
© The Author(s) 2025

Abstract
Business contracts, particularly sale and purchase agreements, often contain a large
number of clauses and are correspondingly long and complex. In practice, it is therefore a great challenge to keep track of their legal context and to identify and avoid
inconsistencies in such contracts. Against this background, we describe a method
and tool called ContractCheck which allows for the consistency analysis of legal
contracts, in particular share purchase agreements (SPAs). In order to identify the
concepts that are relevant for an analysis we define an ontology for SPAs. The
analysis is, then, based on an encoding of the preconditions for the execution of the
clauses of an SPA, as well as on a set of proposed consistency constraints formalized using decidable fragments of first-order logic (FOL). Based on the ontology for
SPAs, textual SPAs are first encoded in a structured natural language format that we
refer to as “blocks”. ContractCheck interprets these blocks and constraints and translates them into assertions formulated in FOL. It then invokes a Satisfiability Modulo
Theory (SMT) solver in order to check the executability of a considered contract,
either by providing a satisfying model, or by proving the existence of conflicting
clauses that prevent the contract from being executed. We illustrate the application
of ContractCheck to concrete SPAs, including one example of an SPA of realistic
size and complexity, and conclude by suggesting directions for future research.
Keywords Logic and law · Contracts · Consistency · SMT solving · Mergers and
acquisitions · Share purchase agreement

* Stefan Leue
Stefan.Leue@uni-konstanz.de
Alan Khoja
Alan.Khoja@uni-konstanz.de
Martin Kölbl
Martin.Koelbl@uni-konstanz.de
Rüdiger Wilhelmi
Ruediger.Wilhelmi@uni-konstanz.de
1

Department of Computer Science, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany

2

Department of Law, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany
Vol.:(0123456789)

A. Khoja et al.

1 Introduction
1.1 Motivation and overview
Contracts are essential in business. They allow the contracting parties to arrange
their legal relationships by giving legal effect to their common will and establishing
mutual claims. A prominent example is the purchase of a company in a share purchase agreement (SPA). Like any contract of sale, an SPA must contain at least the
indispensable essentialia negotii: the purchaser and the seller, as well as the subject
matter of the purchase and the purchase price to be paid. In practice, SPAs regulate
all relevant legal issues in the contract and exclude references to statutory law as far
as possible. As a result, SPAs have a very local semantics, based almost entirely on
the contractual obligations agreed in the SPA (Oetker and Maultzsch 2018).
Contracts, and especially SPAs, are often very long and complex. This is due
to the large number and complexity of the issues to be addressed. In addition, a
large number of people are often involved in drafting contract texts. Furthermore,
the negotiation and the drafting process may extend over a long period of time
and involve a large number of changes to the draft. Length, complexity and frequent changes make a contract prone to errors and inconsistencies, such as incorrect references, missing essential elements and unfulfillable or unenforceable claims.
Inconsistencies in the form of missing essentials can be found by simple syntactic
analysis. It is much more complex to find inconsistencies in the dynamics of multiple claims. Claims should not contradict each other and should be fulfillable and
enforceable in the context of the legal facts described in the contract. Also, the combination of several due dates may be unexpectedly restricted by a statute of limitations stated in the contract.
For instance, assume that an SPA contains a warranty claim that must be asserted
within 14 days after the closing on day 28, then subsequent performance must be
made within 28 days, and otherwise damages must be paid within another 14 days.
Assume further that the contract contains a provision that warranty claims are limited to 42 days after closing. In this example, the warranty clause provides that performance may continue until day 84, while the limitation period ends on day 70.
This means that there are inconsistencies in the timing of the SPA.
We pursue a research agenda that aims at developing analysis methods for the
identification of logical inconsistencies, such as the ones described above, in contract texts, with a specific focus on SPAs. It is our objective to develop automated
methods and tools that do not require input from the user, for instance guidance of
mathematical proving or logical reasoning. We combine this objective with the goal
to permit reasoning about a fairly wide range of data domains, for instance natural
or rational numbers, arithmetic expressions and uninterpreted functions representing
uninterpreted logical predicates. This allows us to reason about, e.g., prices, dates,
timing, interest rates, compensation amounts and ownership properties. The identification of inconsistencies in contract texts is an objective per se. However, it also
enables determining the executability of a contract in terms of sequences of claim
performances, or as a whole. As a use case for the developed method and tool we

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

envision support for legal actors during contract drafting and negotiation, among
others.
In this paper we propose a method and tool called ContractCheck, designed to
formally model and automatically analyze a given SPA. From a technical perspective, the ContractCheck approach is rooted in concepts from symbolic artificial
intelligence, such as symbolic logic reasoning and automated theorem proving, and
inspired by experiences with the use of formal methods in the analysis of software
and system designs. We maintain that automated formal analysis enables the localization of erroneous or inconsistent contractual text by automated logical reasoning,
thereby significantly improving the quality of the contract document. Experience
shows that the adoption of formal analyses in practice is greatly enhanced by a) hiding the formality in the analysis method, i.e., not confronting the end user with the
need to express desired properties or the system model using a formal notation, and
b) the use of fully automated analysis methods that do not impose the burden of
driving the analysis process by providing manual guidance on the user as it would,
for instance, be required when using an interactive theorem prover. These insights
have guided our development of the technical aspects of ContractCheck, in particular the automated form of logical reasoning that ContractCheck relies on.
Against this backdrop, we propose to base the analysis of consistency properties
in SPAs on a formalization of the claims that they encompass using decidable fragments of First-Order Logic (FOL), and to perform the analysis using Satisfiability
Modulo Theory (SMT) solving techniques (Kroening and Strichman 2016; Clarke
et al. 2018; Bjørner 2009). More precisely, we consider an SPA to be a collection
of claims. We define a weakest precondition style semantics for the satisfaction of
claims that is based on enabling conditions for their executability, such as the timing constraints used in the above example. Based on this formalization, we define
two types of logical consistency analysis questions, namely Analyis I, is every claim
in the contract executable, and Analysis II, is there a feasible execution of the SPA.
Answers to these questions rely on determining the satisfiability of the conjunction
of the set of first-order formulae that formalize the claims and the contract execution.
The decision procedures required to analyze satisfiability of these formulae are efficiently implemented in various SMT solving tools, such as the Z3 solver (de Moura
and Bjørner 2008; Bjørner 2009) developed at Microsoft Research, which we use in
our analysis.
1.2 Structure of the paper
After discussing some preliminaries in Sect. 2, we first develop an ontological metamodel for the relevant entities of an SPA and present this as a class diagram from the
Unified Modeling Language (UML) (Object Management Group 2017) in Sect. 3.
Next, we define a semantics for the executability of clauses in an SPA using decidable fragments of quantifier-free FOL in Sect. 4. The formalization of the various
automated consistency analyses performed by ContractCheck is presented in Sect. 5.
Using the running example of the sale of a pretzel bakery, we then illustrate the
automatic consistency analysis of a given SPA using the SMT technology invoked

A. Khoja et al.

by ContractCheck in Sect. 6. We demonstrate the ability of ContractCheck to detect
and explain inconsistencies in a more complex, realistic SPA drawn from the literature in Sect. 7. We discuss threats to the validity of our results in Sect. 8. Finally, we
conclude and outline future research in Sect. 9.
1.3 Scope and methodological considerations
In this paper, we develop the conceptual basis for ContractCheck using SPAs under
German law, but this does not preclude adaptation to contracts with a different subject matter or under other jurisdictions, as they may be more complex but basically
have a comparable structure with similar elements.
Looking at examples of SPAs, it is noticeable that they often consist of very similar blocks of text, differing only in certain parameters, such as the agreed price. In
the case of international company acquisitions, it is estimated that about half of the
text of the provisions is changed little or not at all (Coates 2016). In order to achieve
a formal logical representation of the SPA, as part of our approach and tool we provide a library of parameterized Structured English text blocks that can be freely
combined and used to compose the text of the contract. These blocks allow greater
flexibility than conventional approaches, where contract creation is dialogue-driven
and based on decision trees. Each of these blocks has a formal semantics expressed
by formulae from a decidable fragment of FOL. The conjunction of these conditions
then constitutes the logical representation of the contract. The analysis method that
we describe in this paper generalizes to the class of all concrete contracts that can be
formulated by composing and parameterizing the provided text blocks.
1.4 Approach
Figure 1 sketches our proposed approach towards the analysis of legal contracts.
First, we present a UML Ontology which provides a vocabulary of entities from
the domain of SPAs as well as a representation of their relationships. Based on this
ontology, the ContractCheck tool provides a number of different parameterized
Structured English text skeletons, referred to as blocks, that can be used to formally capture properties of the different clauses in an SPA. From the perspective

Fig. 1  The ContractCheck approach towards automated contract analysis

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

of contract generation, the idea underlying this approach is that users are provided
a collection of blocks, each representing a different type of contract clause, that
they can then compile to form a textual contract document. The resulting collection
of blocks can then be automatically be automatically analyzed by the ContractCheck tool. Notice that in our experiments we do not (yet) take advantage of this contract generation feature. Instead, we are taking existing contract texts and translate
them manually into collections of blocks for later analysis.
ContractCheck implements an automated analysis workflow as indicated by the
red arrows in Fig. 1. For analysis purposes, ContractCheck parses the blocks, determines the entities and relationships using the UML ontology and generates an internal representation of the considered SPA in the form of an UML Object Diagram. The syntactic correctness of the considered SPA is determined by checking
the consistency of the object diagram with the UML-defined ontology. For dynamic
consistency checks, several consistency analyses are generated. In order to prepare the formal analysis, the object diagram is translated into SMT-LIB (Barrett
et al. 2021) format, which the Z3 SMT solver then checks for satisfiability, thereby
determining logical consistency of the clauses contained in the considered SPA. The
results obtained during the SMT solving are presented either by flagging the blocks
that are determined to contradict each other (Analysis I), or by sequence diagrams
representing possible SPA executions in case a contradiction-free execution of the
SPA is possible (Analysis II).
1.5 Related work
We review publications that address the logical modeling and analysis of legal artifacts. We consider the verification of smart contracts, c.f. Braegelmann and Kaulartz
(2019), Paal and Fries (2019), which are effectively described by executable program code, to be outside the scope of this paper, since their analysis is more akin to
program analysis.
Legal modeling and analysis
Several meta-models of different legal domains aiming to describe legal entities
and their relationships have been proposed. A first approach towards representing
contracts with UML has been proposed in Engers et al. (2001). A multi-level hierarchical ontology relying on UML class diagrams in order to support the modeling of
contracts is presented in Kabilan and Johannesson (2003). A modeling of contracts
as business processes has been proposed in Kabilan (2005), Wan and Singh (2005).
In Desai et al. (2008), a business process is translated into state machines to check
whether it is always beneficial for the contracting parties to fulfill their claims during the execution of the contract. Dynamic Condition Response Graphs (Hildebrandt
et al. 2012) (DCR graphs) provides a graph-based language to model the dynamic
dependencies and interactions between different legal conditions and responses
along legal workflows. Temporal and logical properties of the event relations can be
checked using formal analyses, including explicit-state model checking (Clarke et al.
2018).

A. Khoja et al.

LegalRuleML (Palmirani et al. 2011; OASIS Standard 2021; Grupp 2018) is a
specialization of the general language RuleML (Boley et al. 2010) for expressing
relationships between legal entities by means of rules. We are not aware of any
extension of LegalRuleML to analyze contract executions for inconsistencies. The
Contract Specification Language (CSL) is a modeling language that represents
claims as actions in a contract. In Hvitved et al. (2012), the execution of a given
CSL expression is computed as a sequence of actions, which are then analyzed to
determine whether any specified obligations are met. In Henglein et al. (2020), a
contract is interpreted and analyzed as a composition of commitments. In Madaan
et al. (2014), the natural language sentences of an e-contract are translated into a
dependency graph in order to check whether individual provisions contradict each
other.
Deontic logic (Von Wright 1951; McNamara and Van De Putte 2022) is a family of modal logics designed to express the semantics of claims with operators for
the modalities of obligation, permission, and prohibition. A Deontic Propositional
Logic and its axiomatization are defined in Castro and Maibaum (2007). A tableau
calculus for this logic is defined in Castro and Maibaum (2008). Tableau-based decision procedures for a class of logics encompassing temporal and deontic modalities are proposed in Balbiani et al. (2009). These analyses find inconsistencies with
respect to deontic or temporal modalities within a contract, but do not calculate contract executions witnessing these inconsistencies.
The Contract Language CL (Prisacariu and Schneider 2007; Prisacariu and Schneider 2012) encompasses deontic as well as dynamic propositional logic. In Pace
et al. (2007), a contract given in CL is translated into a transition system, which is
then analyzed by the model checker NuSMV for inconsistencies. In Camilleri and
Schneider (2017), a C-O diagram (Martínez et al. 2010), which is a graphical extension of CL , is expressed by state machines and analyzed using the real-time model
checker UPPAAL. The analyses find syntactic inconsistencies and prove a dynamic
inconsistency by a single contract execution. The approach requires an expert to
encode a contract as a C-O diagram. An extension of CL to RCL in Mura and Bonifácio (2015) and Bonifácio and Mura (2021) proposes reasoning about the persons
between whom claims exist using the RECALL tool.
Another system supporting a deontic logic-based approach is the Linear Time
Temporal Logic (LTL)-based language FL (Gorín et al. 2010; Gorín 2011) together
with the model checker FormaLex (Gorín 2011; Faciano et al. 2017).
Schumann and Gómex (2024) review research on consistency analysis in regulatory documents. They observe that the most frequently used class of techniques
for detecting inconsistencies in the studies that they analyze are formal verification
methods. In this context, Mitra et al. (2018) describe consistency analysis of business workflow rules based on an encoding of these rules in the SMT-LIB formalism
and the performance of SMT solving on this encoding. Unlike our work, this work
does not analyze the consistency of legal contracts.
Programming and domain specific languages Catala (Merigoux et al. 2021)
is a functional programming language developed by Microsoft. It is specifically
designed for use in a legal context and is intended to be used to automatically interpret and apply laws and regulations. Flint/eFlint (Van Doesburg et al. 2016; van

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

Binsbergen et al. 2020) is a domain-specific language aiming at the formalization
of normative legal texts. It is based on the framework of legal fundamentals by Kennedy and Fisher (2007). The Flint/eFlint models can be executed and, to a limited
extent, analyzed. L4 (Governatori and Wong 2023), also known as Governatori’s
domain-specific language for the legal domain, is a language that allows the expression of legal rules in a simple and structured way, using the syntax “if precondition
then conclusion”. It is intended to make it easier for legal experts to express legal
rules in a way that can be understood by computers. Stipula (Crafa et al. 2023) is a
domain-specific language that allows for the creation of software legal contracts and
smart legal contracts, focusing on deontic concepts such as permissions, prohibitions, obligations, assets exchanges, escrows and securities.
1.6 Comparison to related work
The logical analysis approach that we propose in this paper focuses on the use of
decidable fragments of FOL in the formalization and the use of decision procedures
for these fragments, implemented in SMT technology, to detect inconsistencies in
SPAs. While many of the approaches mentioned above do have the ability to detect
inconsistencies in the execution of actions, they do not have the ability to also produce models that reveal reasons for inconsistencies that lie in the data, which is an
aspect that we focus on. For instance, in comparison to the cited approaches that use
the UPPAAL real-time model checking tool, we are able to reason at the same time
about inconsistencies in the timing of the execution of claims and in the constraints
on numerical values, such as purchase prices and warranty claims.
Only finite executions are of interest in an SPA, which means that LTL-style
model checking capabilities of infinite behaviors are not required for the purpose of
our consistency analysis.1 The types of analysis performed by FormaLex are based
on standard LTL model checking and encompass a temporal interpretation of deontic modalities, such as obligation. The objectives of this work differ from ours in that
the analysis of domain data is not addressed in FormaLex, while we are not focusing
on reasoning about deontic modalities.
A further difference compared to the cited works lies in the ability of ContractCheck to prioritize primary over secondary claims, an important legal concept in SPAs,
during Analysis II, which allows for a very meaningful type of executability analysis. The above cited approaches are only able to logically link different claims without this type of prioritization.
Comparison to legal reasoning using deontic logics Reasoning based on deontic
logics focuses on the modalities of obligation, permission, and prohibition, which
are ideally suited to reason about properties of claims in legal contracts that need
to be cast in terms of these modalities. Reasoning in these logics means to derive
inferences from the modalities obligatory, impermissible, optional, non-optional,
1

Notice that we are not interested in, for instance, proving that an SPA does not include non-progress
cycles. Consequently, we do not need to reason about liveness properties and can limit our analyses to
safety properties, c.f. Alpern and Schneider (1987).

A. Khoja et al.

permissible and obligatory in the “deontic hexagon” (McNamara and Van De Putte
2022). Depending on the choice of a syntactic fragment and the assumed semantics,
deontic logics may be prone to paradoxes, which limits the possibility of consistency
checking, although numerous fragments with decidable, consistent semantics have
been defined, see for instance Prisacariu and Schneider (2012).
While the logic of claims and the possible sequences of their performance,
which we refer to as contract executions, are a central concept in our paper, we
are not interested in reasoning in terms of the above mentioned deontic modalities. Our approach bears similarities with semantic reasoning about programs,
where contract claims play the role of program statements. We reason whether
starting from an initial configuration of the contractual situation, due to the satisfaction of some logical condition (precondition), the performance of a claim
is possible, and which logical result conditions (postcondition) its execution
entails. The predicates that we use as pre- and postconditions are formulated as
FOL formulae over various decidable theories, such as integer and real arithmetic. This allows us to specify conditions on domain-specific values, such as on
due dates for claim performance, purchase prices or warranty compensations.
We only choose fragments of FOL that are decidable and for which efficient
decision procedures, implemented in SMT solvers such as Z3, are available.
These fully automated solvers are capable of returning models that provide evidence for why a contractual situation is inconsistent.
In conclusion, our approach differs from other analysis approaches relying
on deontic logics in that it combines reasoning on possible contract executions,
checking the consistency of domain-specific predicates, returns explanations for
inconsistencies using domain-specific values, and is availing itself to efficient
automated analysis through practical SMT-solving.

1.7 Contributions
This paper builds on results that appeared in Khoja et al. (2022a, 2022b). It presents an enhanced description of the method, a more comprehensive formalization and a more realistic case study. In particular, the main contributions of the
work documented in this paper are as follows:
1. We propose an ontology for SPAs that we document using the UML.
2. We provide a logical formalization of the semantics of SPAs using decidable fragments of FOL. In doing so, we contribute to the extensive research area dealing
with the use of formal logics in the representation of legal artefacts.
3. We define a set of consistency analyses that are applicable to SPAs.
4. We describe a tool that uses a collection of parameterized natural language building blocks from which textual SPAs can be composed. The possible synthesis of
contract text is not considered in this paper.

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

5. We present the prototype tool called ContractCheck, that uses SMT and satisfiability core technology to perform the consistency analyses and to produce diagnostic information explaining identified inconsistencies.
6. We illustrate the application of this approach to an SPA of a complex example
from legal practice to show that the method is effective and efficient.

2 Preliminaries
We introduce key legal terms, the modeling language used to describe the company sale contract, and the logic we use to formalize a contract.

2.1 Basic legal terms
Even if statutory provisions are largely excluded in an SPA, they are still relevant
for the drafting and interpretation of the agreement (Wilhelmi 2024a). This is
because the contractual provisions are based on the underlying legal system and
its systematics. In particular, the SPA that we use to illustrate our approach contains terms that can only be understood by reference to the legal provisions and
concepts of the German Civil Code (BGB).
Against this backdrop, we explain some basic legal concepts of private law
generally used in contracts, and in SPAs in particular. These concepts regard,
first of all, the distinction between legal subjects and legal objects, the relationships between legal subjects and legal objects and the possibility to change legal
positions.
Legal subjects are, on the one hand, natural persons, i.e. human beings, and,
on the other hand, legal persons, in private law in particular associations and
other corporate bodies such as the public or private limited company. Only they
can be the bearers of rights and obligations and, in particular, be the parties to a
contract (of sale).
Legal objects may be the subject of rights of control and use as well as rights
of disposal of legal subjects. In particular, they include things, i.e., physical
objects, but also rights, such as claims of one legal subject against another legal
subject or company shares, and other assets, such as intangible assets.
Relations between legal subjects are, in particular, claims, i.e., the right of
one legal subject to demand an act or omission from another legal subject, corresponding with the obligation of the other legal subject to this act or omission.
In contracts, a distinction can be made between primary and secondary claims.
Primary claims are the original claims that exist even if the contract is performed
without disturbance, while secondary claims only arise if the performance of the
contract is disturbed and primary claims or other promises are breached. Such
promises can be warranties regarding the existence or non-existence of circumstances. In case of a breach, they can provide a claim for subsequent performance, restitution or compensation.

A. Khoja et al.

Relations between legal subjects and legal objects are also possible. A paradigmatic example is the right of ownership of an object. It basically gives the
owner the right to deal with the thing at her/his discretion and to exclude others
from exercising any influence whatsoever, and can be transferred to others (Wilhelmi 2023).
It is also important to consider the possibility of changes in the legal position,
including the transfer. Claims can arise, become due or not enforceable, change,
or extinguish as a result of actual events and legal transactions. The ownership of
an object can be transferred from one legal subject to another, usually by means
of a contract.
In the case of an SPA, the object of purchase are the shares of a company (share
deal) or the assets held by a company (asset deal) (Wilhelmi 2024b). The purchaser
has a claim against the seller to transfer the ownership of the shares or the assets to
her-/himself. Vice versa, the seller has a claim against the purchaser to transfer the
purchase price. Both claims are primary claims and aimed at a transfer. In addition,
a SPA usually contains warranty claims as secondary claims that give the buyer certain rights against the seller if certain warranties are breached.
2.2 Object oriented modeling
We model the legal relationships of the entities in an SPA using an object-oriented
modeling approach. We illustrate this modeling using a fictitious SPA in which
Eva sells the company Bakery AG to Chris. In an object-oriented modeling
approach, an object describes an element of the real world, sometimes also referred
to as an instance. Instances of the same type are typically aggregated into classes,
where the class then defines the type of the instances that form its membership. The
Unified Modeling Language (UML) (Object Management Group 2017) is the prevailing modeling formalism for object oriented systems. For the models that we propose in this paper, class and object diagrams are the most relevant diagram types of
the UML. Class diagrams represent the classes to which objects are aggregated as
well as the interrelations among classes. Object diagrams depict the relationships of
object instances.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, in the Pretzel Bakery example that we consider,
the type of contract that we use is that of a SharePurchaseAgreement, which

Fig. 2  The object BakerySPA instantiates the class SharePurchaseAgreement

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

defines a class with that type, see the UML class diagram in Fig. 2aA class can
define attributes in the first box below the class name. An attribute represents properties of an object and has a name and a type. For example, an SPA will have an
attribute signing of type date, which contains the date when the contract was
signed, see Fig. 2a. The optional box beneath the attributes lists the operations that
the elements of a class can perform. An operation represents a capability of the
objects of some class, in the example in Fig. 2a for instance the ability that a contract can be signed, indicated by the operation sign(). It sets the attribute signing to the value 0. In the later analyses, it is assumed that the contract starts on
day 0 and this value will be assigned to a logical variable in the formalization of the
SPA.
A UML object diagram illustrates possible values that the attributes of a particular instance of some class can attain. The object BakerySPA in Fig. 2b describes
an instance of the class Share Purchase Agreement and represents the fictitious SPA that we use for illustration purposes in this paper, see Fig. 2b for the
various attributes defined in the class Share Purchase Agreement, e.g., the
names of the Purchaser and the Seller.
Central to the notion of object-oriented modeling is the idea of modeling at different levels of abstraction, using different views on a system. In this context, an
important technique is that of refinement, where a more abstract view of a system
is replaced by a more concrete one, for instance one that reveals more detail of the
internal structure of the considered system. In particular, refinement can be achieved
by replacing an abstract view on the system, for instance given by a single class, by
a more concrete view defined by a collection of more concrete classes as well as a
description of the relationship among these more concrete classes. A further type of
refinement is accomplished in object-oriented modeling by the concept of specialization through inheritance. Here, a more abstract class is specialized into a number of more concrete classes, so that the more concrete classes inherit the attributes
and operations of the parent class, while additional attributes and operations can be
added to the more concrete class.
UML class diagrams permit the modeling of systems using refinement, specialization and aggregation. Classes are represented by rectangles, and relationships
among classes, referred to as associations, are depicted by lines connecting classes.
These lines may have text labels denoting the name of the association, the role of the
classes as well as the cardinalities of the association at either end of the association.
Further triangle- and diamond-shaped labels qualify an association as representing
inheritance and aggregation, respectively. In the following we will illustrate these
concepts in principle using the class diagram in Fig. 3, the meaning of which will be
explained in more detail in Sect. 3. The class diagram in Fig. 3 represents a refined,
more concrete view at the concept of a Share Purchase Agreement. Central is the
concept of a claim, that we use here to illustrate the above mentioned UML modeling concepts.
The class Claim is specialized through inheritance into either a class PrimaryClaim, or a class Secondary Claim, as indicated by the association lines
that connect these classes and that begin with a triangle on the side of the more general class, pointing to it. Inheritance means that all attributes and operations of the

A. Khoja et al.

Fig. 3  Class diagram of a share purchase agreement (SPA)

inheriting class are inherited by the specialized class. For instance, the class PrimaryClaim will inherit attribute DueDate as well as operation assert from
class Claim. Notice that the reverse direction of specialization is also referred to as
generalization, i.e., the classes PrimaryClaim and Secondary Claim can be
generalized to the class Claim.
The association type aggregation represents a part-whole relationship. As indicated by the aggregation associations between classes Claim and Person, a claim
consists of one reference to a person where the person has the role Creditor,
and another where the person has the role Debtor. In the first case the claim is
a Right and in the second case a Debt. The cardinalities of the associations are
indicated by the numbers or ranges at either end of an association. For instance,
there is a 1:1 relation between Claim and Person along the Right / Creditor
aggregation association.
2.3 Decidable fragments of first‑order logic
We formalize the logical constraints implied by the clauses of an SPA in decidable
fragments of FOL. A fragment of FOL is decidable if a complete and terminating
algorithm exists that decides for any formula from this fragment, whether the formula is satisfiable. General FOL is undecidable, which is why we restrict our modeling to decidable fragments of it.

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

The formalization in this paper uses an FOL fragment which includes the decidable theories of linear real arithmetic, equality, integers and uninterpreted functions (Kroening and Strichman 2016). Efficient SMT solvers (Kroening and Strichman
2016), which automatically decide the satisfiability of formulae from these fragments,
are available. In case of satisfiability, they return a satisfying assignment, also referred
to as a model, of values to the logical variables. Otherwise, they return the result unsat
as well as an unsatisfiability core, which contains an explanation for the unsatisfiability. For instance, an SMT solver determines that the formula (x > 0) ∧ (x + y < 0) is
satisfiable and may, for example, return the variable assignment x = 0.9 and y = −2.0
as a satisfying model. When the considered logical constraint system is structured as
a partial MaxSMT instance using what is referred to as “soft assertions", some SMT
solvers, such as for instance Z3, have the ability to return a maximal set of constraints
that are necessary to satisfy an otherwise unsatisfiable model. We will take advantage
of this capability when prioritizing a certain type of claim in the analysis.

3 Contract modeling
We propose the use of UML class diagrams in the ontological modeling of an
abstract view of an SPA. An instance of a class diagram is then used to represent
a concrete legal contract. For legal entities that an expert finds in a concrete legal
contract, s/he instantiates classes and adds values and relations given in the contract
by assigning attributes. The combination of the objects and their assignments is represented using an object diagram. This information will be inserted in the blocks
which are then automatically processed by the ContractCheck tool. The set of blocks
obtained in this way will be the basis for the logical consistency analyses that we
present in later sections. We illustrate this approach by applying it to the modeling
of a concrete example SPA regulating the purchase of a pretzel bakery.
3.1 Modeling of an SPA
For modeling purposes, it is necessary to determine the typical provisions in an SPA.
These can be found in numerous legal template books. For the present project, we have
analysed a large number of templates in a number of form book on German law (von
Hoyenberg 2020a, b; Meyer-Sparenberg 2022a, b; Pfisterer 2022; Seibt 2018a; Seibt
2018; Seibt 2018c, d). We have identified the following provisions as typical for an
SPA: contracting parties, subject matter of purchase, purchase price provisions, conditions and execution, warranties and indemnities, liability, and final provisions.
Based on this, an example SPA containing these typical provisions, which governs the sale of a pretzel bakery, has been developed. We use this SPA as a running example in this paper. We are mainly concerned with the provisions related to
warranties and liability,2, supplemented by the indispensable provisions concerning

2

We set legal terms in italics and terms referring to UML diagrams in teletype font.

A. Khoja et al.

the contracting parties (purchaser and seller), the purchase object and the purchase
price.
From these provisions, we derive an ontology of the provisions in an SPA that
is given as a UML class diagram, presented in Fig. 3. It represents the provisions
of an SPA in the form of UML classes. Note that this ontology can be extended
to other types of contracts. In this paper, we restrict ourselves to considering SPAs
since, compared to other types of contracts, they rely much less on implicit legal
facts implied by legal dogmatics, since these are based on the statutory provisions,
which are typically abandoned in SPAs.
The essential claims in an SPA are the claims between the purchaser and seller
for the shares in the company and the purchase price as well as related claims from
warranties. We illustrate their relationship using a UML Activity Diagram depicted
in Fig. 4.
When the contract is signed (Signing), the claim for payment of the purchase
price (PayClaim) and the claim for transfer of the shares (TransferClaim)
arise. In contrast, a claim resulting from a warranty (WarrantyClaim) only
becomes effective if additionally a condition is satisfied.
For each Claim one person (Creditor) can demand the performance and
another person (Debtor) owes the performance as a duty. The performance can be
a behavior or the production of an outcome (Performance). For the PayClaim,
the Creditor is the seller, the Debtor is the purchaser and the Performance
is the payment of the purchase price by the purchaser to the seller. For the TransferClaim, the Creditor is the purchaser, the Debtor is the seller and the
Performance is the transfer of the shares by the seller to the purchaser.
A WarrantyClaim additionally requires the breach of the warranty as WarrantyCondition to become effective. Otherwise, the creditor cannot enforce it
and its assessment ends, whereas the assessment of the other Claims is independent of this. WarrantyClaims can be distinguished into three types, depending on
the content of their performance (PerformanceContent): the performance of
the content of the warranty (PerformanceClaim), the restitution of the purchase
price (RestitutionClaim) and the compensation of the damages of the purchaser (CompensationClaim). A CompensationClaim is often additionally
limited in the way that the damage must reach a minimum value (Min), otherwise
the creditor cannot enforce it and its assessment ends, whereas the assessment of
the other Claims is independent of this. For the the three WarrantyClaims, the
creditor is the purchaser and the debtor is the seller.
Each of these Claims independently not only needs to have arisen, but also
needs to have not extinguished, be due and not yet fall under the limitation. If the
owed Performance is rendered, the Claim extinguishes and the creditor
cannot assert (and enforce) it. If the Claim is not yet Due, which here means before
the Closing, the creditor cannot yet enforce the Claim, but the debtor can
still satisfy it in rendering the performance. If the Claim is due, the creditor can assert and enforce it and the debtor has to satisfy it up to the LimitationDate. From the LimitationDate, the creditor can enforce the
Claim only, if the debtor does not raise the defense of the statute of limitations
(LimitationDefense), otherwise the creditor cannot enforce the Claim.

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

Fig. 4  Claim arise and fulfillment in the Bakery contract

The respective run ends when all Claims have been examined. The contract ends
when all Claims have extinguished or are no longer enforceable.
In the UML class diagram, depicted in Fig. 3, each SPA has at least one Person as Seller and another Person as Buyer. For each Claim, either the
Purchaser or the Seller is the Debtor, who owes the Performance as
Debt, and the other one is the Creditor, who has the Right to demand the

A. Khoja et al.

Performance in asserting the Claim. For each Claim, either the Purchaser or the Seller is the Debtor and the other one is the Creditor.
The Creditor has the Right to demand, that the Debtor pays his Debt in
rendering the Performance. The exercise of this Right is described as the
operation assert. The promised Performance is described as an attribute
in the Claim. The date from which the Claim is due, i.e. the date from which
the Creditor can assert it, is described with the attribute DueDate. The
date from which the Debtor is entitled to refuse Performance of the Claim
in raising the defense of the statute of limitations is described with the attribute LimitationDate. A claim is extinguished if the performance owed is
rendered.
We distinguish between PrimaryClaims and SecondaryClaims. PrimaryClaims contain the Performances that are typical for the contract. They
are performed if there is no disturbance of the contract. The claims to transfer the
shares and the purchase price are PrimaryClaims. To cover their Performance, we need to model the Shares and PurchasePrice and their generalization property right, because the Debtor performs the Claim, when
s/he is the Owner of the PropertyRight in the Shares or the PurchasePrice and transfers this right to the Creditor. The PrimaryClaims have
to be performed from the outset by the DueDate, sometimes under the condition
of the Performance of another PrimaryClaim. In contrast, SecondaryClaims arise only if the contract is disturbed. They are subject to a specific condition, which we refer to as a WarrantyCondition. This condition may consist
of the breach of another claim, often a PrimaryClaim. It may also consist of the
breach of separately enumerated circumstances as a condition independent of the
breach of another claim, which is typical of SPAs. We model these conditions with
the attribute Formula. SecondaryClaims for which the WarrantyCondition entails the breach of another Claim, are consequence claims. In this case,
the link between the WarrantyCondition and the other Claim is represented
by an association named Trigger. SecondaryClaims for which the WarrantyCondition only entails separately enumerated circumstances, are called independent warranty claims. They are independent claims if they do not refer to other
claims.
The most important secondary claims in an SPA are warranty claims (Wilhelmi
2024c). A WarrantyClaim relates to an unknown risk arising from a breach of a
primary claim, or from listed circumstances that are not expected but are considered
probable enough to require regulation. A warranty consists of the warranty content
as a prerequisite and one or more warranty claims as a consequence of a breach
of the warranty. The warranty content includes the existence or non-existence of
certain circumstances, which usually concern the purchase object and, in particular, its properties. It contains the WarrantyCondition for the warranty claims.
They are usually claims of the purchaser for monetary compensation for the damage
caused by the breach of the WarrantyCondition, irrespective of fault (CompensationClaim). It is also possible to agree on a claim for subsequent performance (PerformanceClaim) or a right of Withdrawal which, in the case of
a notice of withdrawal (noticeWithdraw), terminates the contract and may give

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

Fig. 5  Object diagram of Bakery SPA (with only partial depiction of the associations to avoid clutter)

the purchaser a claim for restitution of the purchase price and the seller a claim for
restitution of the shares (RestitutionClaims). A CompensationClaim is
often limited in the way that it only arises, if the Damage reaches a minimum value
Min, and the Compensation is capped at a maximum value Max. The limitation
may apply only to individual claims or to all claims under the contract. If the purchaser has a claim for compensation, this may be set off against the purchase price
claim, so that the total amount of money to be paid is reduced accordingly.
The due date of a consequence claim is usually relative to the assertion date of a
warranty. The contract model supports absolute and relative time relations. Relative
time differences start with the plus sign + and are relative towards the occurring or
asserting date of the claim to which the Trigger refers. Examples are given in
Fig. 5. The PerformanceClaim has to be performed within +28 days after the
PretzelWarranty was asserted. The limitation 28 + 42 of the claim is given as
an absolute value.
A claim can also have an association Precede to another claim. A claim does
not become due without its preceding claim being performed beforehand. For
instance, the payment of the purchase price may be expected to occur before the
transfer of the shares. Otherwise, the seller can defense the share transfer because of
the lack of payment. In this case, the Claim for the PurchasePrice is a preceding claim that has the performance of the Claim for the Shares as a condition. In
the diagram in Fig. 3, the link between the claim and the preceding claim on whose
occurrence it defenses is represented by a self-association named Precede.
Example 1 (Bakery SPA) As a running example, we use an SPA for the fictitious
sale of a pretzel bakery from the seller Eva to the purchaser Chris.3 This SPA is a
concrete instance of the SPA type depicted in the class diagram in Fig. 3. This concrete instance is shown in the UML class diagram presented in Fig. 5. In the bakery

3

The text of the Bakery SPA is given in the “Appendix”.

A. Khoja et al.

SPA, Chris agrees to pay the purchase price of €40, 000 (PayClaim), and Eva
agrees to give Chris ownership of the bakery by transferring Shares of the Bakery, which constitutes the TransferClaim. Both claims are due on the agreed
closing date of 28 days after signing. If the pretzel bakery is not transferred or the
purchase price is not paid at closing, the other party may withdraw from the purchase agreement. The conditions about arise and fulfillment of claim in the Bakery
SPA is depicted in the activity diagram in Fig. 4.
In addition to the primary claims, Eva provides a warranty in a WarrantyClaim named PretzelWarranty which states that the bakery can bake
at least 10, 000 pretzels a day. In the example, if the bakery cannot bake at least
10, 000 pretzels a day, then the warranty is breached and Chris must assert this
breach within the DueDate of +14 days after closing. In the event of an assertion, Eva has to make good within +28 days because of the PerformanceClaim
Claim1, otherwise she has to pay within +14 days a compensation of €1, 000 per
100 of pretzels that cannot be baked, due to the CompensationClaim Claim2,
which entails a minimal compensation of €1000. Any claim under the warranty has
a Limitation of 42 days from closing. Other crucial facts are represented in the
bakery SPA. Because of Eva’s debts, a local bank Bank has a security interest in
the shares of the bakery SecurityOwnership. Under German law, this means
that the bank is the (security) owner of the bakery.
Manual inspection reveals the following inconsistencies in the SPA: Eva’s primary claim according to the SPA is to transfer the bakery to Chris. To satisfy her
claim, she must be the owner. Note, however, that the Bank is the owner of the bakery by virtue of the transfer of ownership by way of security. Eva cannot fulfill her
claim because she is no longer the owner of the bakery, which we consider an inconsistency. While there are legal ways for dealing with this situation, the objective of
our consistency analysis will be to point out such stipulations that require further
attention. Another inconsistency is due to the timing of the claims. The PretzelWarranty has a Limitation of 42 days but if an assertion occurs within 14
days after closing, the consequence Claim1 takes up to 28 days and Claim2
another 14 days. This implies that Claim2 can take up to 56 days after closing,
contrary to the Limitation of 42 days.

4 Formalization
We present the logical encoding of the objects of an SPA in decidable fragments of
FOL, as this turns out to be ideally suited to accommodate consistency checking for
a large variety of possible legal scenarios, including ones that are not known at the
time of signing. The versatility of available decidable first-order theories allows us
to capture a large range of domain constraints in SPAs.

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

We then demonstrate the applicability of the proposed encoding using the pretzel
bakery SPA case study that we introduced above. The aim of this encoding is to
enable a model-based satisfiability analysis to determine logical consistency of the
provisions of an SPA. A satisfying model for the logical encoding represents a possible execution of the considered SPA. An unsatisfiable encoding, on the other hand,
hints at either inconsistent claims or even a non-executable contract. We intend the
consistency analyses in Sect. 5 to be performed primarily before signing, when the
legal facts are only partially known.

4.1 Logical formalization of contract entities
The quintessential concept of a contract is that of mutual claims, i.e., the right of a
legal subject to demand an act or omission from another legal subject. An SPA consists of a set of claims with which an execution of the SPA must comply. Whether
a claim is performed in an execution depends on the objective situation and the
behavior of the contracting parties, which we call legal facts. We use variables over
various domains to model these facts, such as integers to model purchase prices and
dates, and first order predicates to model property relations. We restrict their possible values according to the constraints specified in the SPA. These facts are then
used to specify pre- and postconditions for the execution of claims as they can be
extracted from the SPA.
We define the execution of a contract as the performance of a sequence of claims.
A particular execution of a claim is determined by a combination of claims and the
satisfaction of their preconditions, which includes factual and legal information
given by the provisions of the contract, such that for each primary claim or independent claim, the claim itself or one of its associated consequence claims is performed. The pre- and postconditions for the execution of the claims define a weakest precondition semantics of the contract stipulations in the sense that the logical
formulae that use in the formalization capture a precondition for the executability
of a claim, for instance that the due date of a particular claim has been reached, and
a postcondition that expresses that this claim has now been executed. Note that not
every claim in an SPA must be performed in a particular given execution.
The types of inconsistencies in claims and among claims encompass the
following:
• primary and secondary claims may be performed outside the time interval

between their due dates and the limitation date specified in the contract,

• a secondary claim is not performed in this time interval in spite of the fact that

the corresponding primary claim is not performed,

• the compensation performed by executing a warranty claim is not within the lim-

its specified in the contract,

• numerical values, such as the purchase price or a numerical performance charac-

teristic, are not within specified limits, and

A. Khoja et al.

• an ownership relation is violated, e.g., by selling an item that the seller is not the

owner of.

Notice that this list is not claiming to exhaustively cover all possible inconsistencies
in contract texts. Rather, it covers a large portion of inconsistencies that are encountered in legal practice.
First, in Sect. 4.1.1 we formalize the legal facts, then in Sect. 4.1.2 we provide abstract formalizations of the types of claims that we analyze, and finally in
Sect. 4.1.3 we compose the formalization of individual claims in such a way that
a satisfying assignment of the composed formula corresponds to a possible SPA
execution.
4.1.1 Formalization of legal facts
An SPA according to the class diagram in Fig. 3 contains a set P of persons and a
distinct set O of objects. In the formal model that we build we assume that the persons p and the objects o have unique identifiers.
Dates in an SPA are usually given by calendar dates. Calendar dates are complicated to process due to the many rules that govern them, such as the treatment
of leap years. In the formalization, we simplify the processing and represent dates
using integer variables. An execution of an SPA begins on date dS = 0 with the signature of all contract parties, referred to as the signing. The closing is performed on
date dC when the transfer of the business ownership is performed. For each claim c
in an SPA, we define a date dc which represents its date of performance.
An ownership can only be transferred from the current owner to a new owner
if the ownership rights lie with the seller. As depicted in Fig. 3, Property relations
relating an object to an owner can be represented by associating the class PropertyRight using an association Owner with a Person p, and using an association Property with an Object o. We define a set PR , consisting of a tuple
(p, o) for every instance of PropertyRight, in the object diagram representing
the contract instance that is being analyzed, c.f. Fig. 5. In our analysis model, we
formally capture the property rights using a first-order uninterpreted function predicate owner(Object) ∶ Person:
⋀
𝜙owner =
owner(o) = p.
(1)
(p,o)∈PR

The first-order formula 𝜙owner then represents the property relations stated in the
SPA.
4.1.2 Formalization of claims
Having formalized the legal facts stated in an SPA we are now ready to formalize
the claims that it contains. Notice that we refer to classes, object instances, operations, association names and association roles as they are defined in Figs. 3 and 5.

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

We define a set C to consist of the claims stated in an SPA. The set CI contains
the primary claims and the independent warranty claims of the considered SPA. For
every claim c, the set Cc contains every secondary claim s that is connected via the
association Trigger to c. In the following, we refer to a claim in Cc as a consequence claim of c.
Each claim c in the SPA contains a Performance lc, which specifies an action
that must be executed for the claim to be performed. The action to which lc refers is
either represented by a logical formula or by the name of an operation in Fig. 3. In the
latter case, lc is replaced by the logical formalization of the pre- and postconditions of
the corresponding operation. For example, the precondition for a property transfer p of
an object o from the debtor d to a creditor in terms of the property rights is represented
p
by the constraint lc ≡ owner(o) = d.
For every primary or secondary claim c there exists a performance date dc. The
value of dc is either −1, which we use to express the fact that the claim has not yet been
performed, or in the interval [𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎, 𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗]. If DueDate is undefined in
the considered SPA and, consequently, in the corresponding object diagram, then its
default value is the value of date Arise of the claim. In case DueDate is a positive number, then we replace it with 𝙰𝚛𝚒𝚜𝚎 + 𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎. In conclusion, we formalize a
claim c using the logical constraint

𝜙c ≡ (dc = −1) ∨ ((c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dc ≤ c.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗) ∧ lc ).

(2)

In order to relate this to the pre-/postcondition semantics that we allude to above,
notice that the subformula c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dc ≤ c.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗 represents a precondition for the executability of c, and the subformula lc expresses the postcondition that
c has now been executed.
A WarrantyClaim w is a specialization of a secondary claim in the sense that it
is an independent claim. For this reason, in our formalization, the constraint dw = −1
encodes that w is met, and otherwise it is breached on a date dw ≥ 0. A warranty w is
formalized by

𝜙w ≡ (dw = −1 ⇒ lw ) ∨ (w.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dw ≤ w.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗).

(3)

If a primary claim or an independent claim is not performed, the Debtor is
obliged to perform a consequence claim s that is associated with the claim. A
primary claim is breached when it is not performed (dc = −1), while a warranty
is breached on the date dw of the notification that the WarrantyCondition
is not met. In order to formally capture the consequence claims that belong to a
claim, we introduce a fresh integer variable dc′ with value −1 when the associated
claim is performed. The value of dc′ is c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 for a breached primary claim
and the value of dc for a breached warranty. In case s is a performance claim, its
formalization with a performance date ds and a Performance lc is defined as
𝜙s ≡ (dc� < ds ≤ s.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗) ∧ lc. In case s is a restitution claim, the SPA is withdrawn, formally 𝜙s ≡ dc′ < ds ≤ s.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗. In case s is a compensation claim,
the debtor pays a positive compensation ls to the creditor. The value of ls is the Compensation that specifies the amount of the compensation payment. As expressed

A. Khoja et al.

by Formula 4, ls is constrained to be in a range between a minimum amount Min and
a maximum amount Max.

⎧ 0,
⎪
𝜙Compensation ≡ ls = ⎨ 𝙼𝚊𝚡
⎪ Compensation,
⎩

if Compensation < 𝙼𝚒𝚗
if Compensation > 𝙼𝚊𝚡
otherwise

(4)

In every of the above cases, the compensation is performed. In conclusion, the compensation claim is formally a constraint

𝜙s ≡ 𝜙Compensation ∧ ((ds = −1 ⇒ Compensation = 0) ∨
(dc� < ds ≤ s.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗)).

(5)

4.1.3 Execution of an SPA
We are now prepared to present the logical formalization of the executions permitted by an SPA by a formula 𝜙SPA , given in Eq. 6. It captures the property rights
and the claims included as an SPA by conjoining their above given formalizations. It also ensures that in an execution of an SPA, for every primary and every
independent claim, either the claim or one of its consequence claims will be
performed.
⋀
⋀
⋁
𝜙SPA ≡ 𝜙owner ∧
𝜙c ∧
(dc ≥ 0 ∨
ds ≥ 0).
(6)
c∈C

∀s∈Cc

c∈CI

An SMT solver, such as Z3, will produce a satisfiable model for 𝜙SPA in case such a
satisfiable model and, consequently, an execution of the SPA exist. This model then
represents an execution of the SPA that is consistent with all constraints specified in
the SPA and formally represented by 𝜙SPA.
During the execution of a contract, the contracting parties often have a choice
as to whether to fulfill a primary claim or an independent claim, or to breach that
primary claim or independent claim and be subject to a secondary claim that results
from the breach. This second option may put a contracting party into an advantageous position (“efficient breach”). It is not the objective of our work to determine
advantageous courses of action for the contracting parties. Nonetheless, in the analysis it might be worthwhile to determine whether an execution of the contract involving just primary claims is at all possible, in order to obtain a deeper understanding
of the functioning of the considered contract. To support this idea, we propose a
logical encoding that permits the prioritization of primary claims over secondary
claims during analysis. We introduce a set 𝜙soft of logical assertions that is encoded
in Z3 using what is referred to as “soft-asserts”, c.f. Eq. 7.
⋀
⋀
𝜙soft ≡
dc ≥ 0 ∧
ds = −1
(7)
c∈CI

s∈Cc

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

The SMT solver Z3 computes an optimal solution for the partially satisfiable MaxSMT problem 𝜙SPA ∧ 𝜙soft . The computed solution is optimal in the sense that the
smallest number of assertions in 𝜙soft , each corresponding to a breach of a primary
or independent claim and the execution of a secondary claim, is made satisfied,
which means that the corresponding secondary claim will be executed. As a consequence, Z3 returns a satisfying model representing an execution of the SPA that
satisfies as few consequence and independent claims as possible.
4.2 Formalization of the Bakery SPA
We now illustrate the application of the formalization described above to the Pretzel
Bakery SPA case study.
4.2.1 Legal facts in the Bakery SPA
The bakery SPA B describes a set of persons PB = {𝙴𝚟𝚊, 𝙲𝚑𝚛𝚒𝚜, 𝙱𝚊𝚗𝚔} and an object
set OB = {𝙱𝚊𝚔𝚎𝚛𝚢, 𝙿𝚛𝚒𝚌𝚎} which includes the shares of the Bakery and the purchase
price Price. The SPA also states that the ownership of Bakery is transferred by way
of security to Bank, encoded as

𝜙Bowner ≡ owner(Bakery) = Bank.

(8)

4.2.2 Claims in the Bakery SPA
Eva is obliged by the TransferClaim to transfer the shares of the bakery on a day
du. She has to perform the TransferClaim on the day of Closing (28). In case
she misses that date, Chris has a claim on her delivery of the shares. Eva can only
perform the transfer if she is the owner of Bakery. These facts are captured using the
constraint

𝜙TransferClaim ≡ (−1 = du ) ∨ ((28 ≤ du ) ∧ (owner(Bakery) = Eva)).

(9)

Furthermore, Chris is obliged by the PayClaim to pay the amount of Price
to Eva. The condition for the transfer is formally captured by the constraint
owner(Price) = Chris. The transfer is performed on a day dz and is due on day 28.
The formalization of the PayClaim is then given as

𝜙PayClaim ≡(−1 = dz ) ∨ ((28 ≤ dz ) ∧ owner(PurchasePrice) = Chris)).

(10)

If one of these two primary claims is not performed, then the related RestitutionClaim (shorthand: Res.) allows the respective creditor on a date ≥ 0 to withdraw from the SPA, formally captured by the formulas

𝜙Res.Purchaser ≡ dRes.Purchaser = −1 ∨ PayClaim.DueDate < dRes.Purchaser

(11)

A. Khoja et al.

and 𝜙Res.Seller ≡ dRes.Seller = −1 ∨ TransferClaim.DueDate < dRes.Purchaser . (12)
If the warranty claim PretzelWarranty is breached, then Chris notifies Eva of
this breach on a day dg ≥ 0. Notice that dg = −1 is used to encode that there is no
indication of a non-performance and, therefore, the warranty Condition, which
stipulates that Pretzels = 10, 000, is met. The formalization for the PretzelWarranty is then given as

𝜙PretzelWarranty ≡ (dg = −1 ∧ Pretzels = 10, 000) ∨ (28 ≤ dg ≤ 28 + 14). (13)
In the bakery SPA, the warranty has the consequence Claim1 of type PerformanceClaim, which implies that the seller must perform the pretzel guarantee
on a date dn in case the warranty is not met. This is encoded using the following
formula:

𝜙Claim1 ≡ (dn = −1) ∨ (dg < dn ≤ dg + 28 ∧ Pretzels = 10, 000).

(14)

On the other hand, following the idea of an efficient breach it may be more advantageous for the debtor to pay a compensation ls on a date ds according to the attribute
Compensation of the object Claim2 of type CompensationClaim. The
value of ls is constrained by the formula 𝜙sCompensation. If no compensation occurs
(ds = −1), then ls is 0. The formalization of the logical constraint encoding Claim2
is

𝜙Claim2 ≡ 𝜙sCompensation ∧ ((ds = −1 ∧ ls = 0) ∨ (dg < ds ≤ dg + 28 + 14)). (15)
In order to concretize 𝜙sCompensation, consider that the amount of compensation ls is
either 0, or lies in the range of values between a minimum value Min and a maximum value Max. In order for a compensation to be paid, ls must exceed the value of
€1, 000, while an upper limit Max is not specified. ls is calculated according to the
constraint 𝜙sCompensation defined as follows:
{
0, if (10, 000 − Pretzels∕100) ∗ 1, 000 ≤ 1, 000, and
𝜙sCompensation ≡ ls =
(10, 000 − Pretzels∕100) ∗ 1, 000, otherwise.
(16)

4.2.3 Execution of the Bakery SPA
The overall encoding of the claims in the bakery SPA formalized in Eq. 6 is given as

𝜙BSPA ≡ 𝜙Bowner ∧ (𝜙TransferClaim ∨ 𝜙Res.Purchaser ) ∧ (𝜙PayClaim ∨
𝜙Res.Seller ) ∧ (𝜙PretzelWarranty ∨ 𝜙Claim1 ∨ 𝜙Claim2 ).

(17)

The formula 17 encodes the freedom to perform a claim or one of its consequences by a disjunction of the individual claim constraints. In order to express
that all claims or their consequence claims need to be performed, we conjoin the

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

subformulae related to the individual claims and the legal facts to form the constraint 𝜙BSPA that represents the encoding of all claims in the SPA. Notice that an
execution of the bakery SPA does not necessarily need to perform every primary
claim, but can also perform the associated consequence claim for some or all of the
primary claims. However, a satisfying model of 𝜙BSPA should preferably represent the
performance of a sequence of primary or independent claims. This is formalized by
the following formulas which are characterized as "soft-asserts" in the smtlib encoding handed over to the SMT solver:

𝜙Bsoft ≡ du ≥ 0 ∧ dz ≥ 0 ∧ dRes.Purchaser = −1 ∧
dRes.Seller = −1 ∧ dg = −1 ∧ dn = −1.

(18)

The bakery SPA is formalized by the constraint 𝜙BSPA ∧ 𝜙Bsoft . Each satisfying model
of this constraint represents a possible execution of the bakery SPA.
Number of contract executions The steps of a contract execution can be distinguished into the performance of claims and into the assignment of variable
values. Examples of the latter are the number of possible choices of prices and
the days on which the claims are performed. For instance, each choice of a price
leads to a distinct execution. Since there are infinitely many possible prices to
choose from, there are infinitely many executions. Notice that in general due to
the use of variables of type integer or real in the formalization, the number of
resulting distinct contract executions is (countably) infinite.
We now argue why, nonetheless, only a finite number of different sequences
of claim executions need to be considered. In a contract execution, every claim
is either performed or not. The claims are related by a Trigger. If a claim is not
performed, another claim is triggered and arises. The claims of the bakery SPA
trigger one another as depicted in the activity diagram in Fig. 6. The claims that
are related by a trigger Trigger are in the same trigger set. For the Bakery example, Fig. 6 shows 3 trigger sets with 2, 2 and 3 elements. Out of each trigger
set, exactly one claim needs to be performed in an execution. This leads to 12
different combinations of claim executions that can be performed in a contract
execution.

Fig. 6  Claims that are related by a Trigger in the Bakery contract

A. Khoja et al.

5 Contract analyses
In this section we discuss the syntactic and semantic consistency analyses that we
propose, based on the above presented formalization of an SPA.
5.1 Syntactic analyses
Our paper focuses on semantic analyses, based on our logical formalization. However, in addition to these semantic analyses, our analysis framework allows for the
analysis of syntactic properties of an SPA. In particular, we can easily perform
syntactic completeness checking, since the ontological modeling allows us to infer
some syntactic correctness and completeness criteria, e.g. that an SPA lacks essential legal elements. For example, an SPA is not legally valid if one of the essential
elements (essentialia negotii) is missing. According to the German civil code (BGB,
2024,§433), the contract of sale must contain the parties to the contract, the subject
matter of the purchase and the purchase price. In an SPA, every primary claim also
needs at least one consequential claim and every claim needs a DueDate by which
it is to be performed. Syntactic completeness checks can easily be performed when
parsing the block model of a concrete SPA instance, based on the Class diagram in
Fig. 3. However, in the sequel we will focus on presenting the semantic consistency
analysis of SPAs.
5.2 Semantic analyses
Finding a dynamic inconsistency that occurs during SPA contract execution requires
reasoning about the dynamic semantics of executing an SPA. As discussed above,
an SPA describes both legal facts and claims agreed by the parties. For example,
Eva agrees to transfer the shares of the bakery in the considered pretzel bakery SPA.
In order to transfer ownership of the shares, she must be the owner of the bakery,
and hence, the shares. This contradicts the fact that the bank owns the shares in the
bakery. Interestingly, in spite of this semantic inconsistency the SPA can be executed or fulfilled because Chris can withdraw from the contract. Nonetheless, an
SPA which leaves Chris no option but to withdraw is neither meaningful nor desirable and should therefore be tagged with a “red flag” as a result of the analysis. This
illustrates that for an SPA it is essential that a) each claim can be fulfilled individually, and b) that at least one meaningful execution of the SPA exists. Consequently,
we propose two types of semantic consistency analyses for an SPA:
Analysis I:	Can each claim be performed?
Analysis II:	Does there exist an execution of the SPA?

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

5.3 Formalization of the dynamic consistency analyses
We now encode analyses I and II for a given SPA using the formalized constraints presented in Sect. 4. If an encoded analysis is satisfiable, then an SMT
solver, such as Z3, returns a model given by a satisfying variable assignment.
The returned model represents either individual claims or entire contract executions that are consistent and can be executed. If it is unsatisfiable, the SMT solver
can return an unsatisfiability core, which is a minimal subset of conditions that
contradicts satisfiability. This subset indicates which claims in the SPA contradict
each other and, hence, cause an inconsistency in the SPA. The respective claims
need to be changed in the SPA in order to obtain a consistent contract.
Remember, a primary claim c is performed on date dc and a warranty w is
asserted on day dw . In the following, in order to simplify the presentation we
abuse notation and ignore that warranties and claims behave differently. In the
formulae that follow, dc >= 0 needs to be substituted by dw == −1 for every warranty w.
Analysis I (Claim consistency) is encoded using the constraints Φc and Φs for
every claim in C . We presented the formalization for a claim c by a constraint 𝜙c ,
which has to be performed on a date dc in Sect. 4.1.2. For every claim, in order
for it to be fulfillable, the property relation represented by 𝜙owner has to hold. A
primary claim c or an independent claim c ∈ CI can be performed when the following constraint is satisfiable:

Φc ≡ 𝜙owner ∧ 𝜙c ∧ dc ≥ 0.

(19)

A consequence claim s ∈ C(c) in an SPA usually needs to be performed if, at the
same time, the claim c that is the Trigger of s is not performed:

Φs ≡ 𝜙owner ∧ (dc = −1) ∧ 𝜙c ∧ 𝜙s ∧ ds ≥ 0.

(20)

If every constraint Φc and Φs is independently satisfiable, then every claim of the
considered formalized SPA can be performed.
Analysis II (Contract Executability) checks whether an execution of the SPA
exists by assessing the satisfiability of

ΦSPA ≡ 𝜙SPA ∧ 𝜙soft .

(21)

In addition, Analysis II recognizes whether all primary claims and independent
claims can be performed in the same execution, which means that no secondary
claim in the contract needs to be executed. If that is the case, then every constraint in
𝜙soft is satisfied.

A. Khoja et al.

5.4 Dynamic consistency analyses of the Bakery SPA
We now apply the dynamic analyses to the pretzel bakery SPA. The object diagram in Fig. 5 represents the information relevant for the analysis, such as the
values of dates, the amounts of money and the names of the seller and the purchaser. After reading and parsing collection of blocks representing this contract,
ContractCheck generates the following analyses and checks them for satisfiability
by invoking the SMT solver Z3.
Analysis I (Claim Consistency) checks whether the individual primary claims
and independent claims are fulfillable. The TransferClaim is formalized in the
Eq. 9 and the corresponding Analysis I is

ΦTransferClaim ≡ 𝜙Bowner ∧ 𝜙TransferClaim ∧ du ≥ 0
≡ owner(Bakery) = Bank ∧ (du = −1 ∨
(28 ≤ du ∧ owner(Bakery) = Eva)) ∧ du ≥ 0.

(22)

owner is a function, therefore the two constraints owner(Bakery) = Bank and
owner(Bakery) = Eva are functionally inconsistent. As a consequence, the claim
cannot be performed, which indicates that the contract contains a logical inconsistency. The SMT solver returns these two inconsistent constraints as an unsatisfiability core.
Analysis I for the PayClaim (Eq. 10) is performed by determining satisfiability of the following constraint:
ΦPayClaim ≡ owner(Bakery) = Bank ∧ (dz = −1 ∨
(28 ≤ dz ∧ owner(Price) = Chris)) ∧ dz ≥ 0.

(23)

The SPA states that the closing should be performed on day dz = 28. A possible
model that an SMT solver computes which satisfies this constraint contains the
assignments dz = 28 and owner(Price) = Chris which indicates that Chris pays the
purchase price on day 28 after signing. We can conclude that the PayClaim can be
performed.
Analysis I for the PretzelWarranty (Eq. 13) is performed by determining satisfiability of the following constraint:

ΦPretzelWarranty ≡ owner(Bakery) = Bank ∧ (28 ≤ dg ≤ 28 + 14 ∨
(dg = −1 ∧ pretzels = 10, 000)) ∧ dg = −1.

(24)

ΦPretzelWarranty is satisfiable for dg = −1 and pretzels = 10, 000. This means that the
pretzel bakery meets the warranty requirement and the warranty claim is performed.
The Analysis II (Contract Executability) for the pretzel bakery example is
encoded in the constraint ΦBSPA ≡ 𝜙BSPA ∧ 𝜙Bsoft , following Eq. 21. It can be used to
check whether an execution of the bakery SPA exists. The SMT solver that we
use in our automated analysis searches for a satisfiable assignment and computes, for instance, a model with the following date assignments:

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

du = −1, dz = 28, dg = −1, dn = −1, ds = −1,
dResitutionSeller = −1, dResitutionPurchaser = 29.

(25)

This outcome implies that the bakery SPA can be performed, even though it is
inconsistent since the primary claim TransferClaim cannot be performed. It
exemplifies that the inconsistency of an SPA does not imply that it cannot be performed. Furthermore, as the SMT solver confirms, if the bakery were not assigned
by way of security, but instead owner(𝙱𝚊𝚔𝚎𝚛𝚢) = Eva held, the pretzel bakery SPA
would be consistent.
5.5 Further dynamic analyses
We now present some further analyses that address single claims. They differ
from Analysis I in the sense that they are not a prerequisite for the Analysis II.
Unsatisfiability of single claims A claim may or may not be satisfied during
the execution of a contract. The model of a contract must support both cases. If
a claim is not fulfilled, further claims arise as a consequence for the non-fulfillment. We propose a further analysis which establishes that a contract is executable even though a claim c may not be satisfied, expressed by the constraint Φunsat_c
:

Φunsat_c ≡ 𝜙SPA ∧ c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 = −1.

(26)

Assume the pretzel bakery example SPA not to specify any restitution claim. When
we apply the analysis in Eq. 26 to the TransferClaim, the constraint
ΦBunsat_TranferClaim will be created:

ΦBunsat_TranferClaim ≡ 𝜙SPA ∧ du = −1.

(27)

Since there is no consequence for the PerformanceClaim, no contract execution
exists in which this claim is unsatisfied. It follows that ΦBunsat_TranferClaim is unsatisfiable. One possible reason for this analysis to fail is that a primary or independent
claim does not possess a consequence claim. Notice that, if for instance a warranty
is unsatisfied, a consequence like a compensation should be paid. Without a consequence claim, the encoding enforces that the claim is always satisfied as there is no
consequence claim that can be satisfied instead.
Claim defense analysis A claim c can be defensed because of the lack of performance of another claim d. This relation is represented by a Precede association. When c would become due before d and d precedes c, then c cannot be performed in time. The analysis of the constraint ΦPrecede_c_d checks for such timing
inconsistencies. It is satisfiable if the inconsistency exists in the considered SPA:

ΦPrecede_c_d ≡ 𝜙owner ∧ 𝜙c ∧ 𝜙d ∧ c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 < d.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎.

(28)

In the pretzel bakery SPA example, the payment of the bakery precedes the transfer
occurring first. Consequently, the due date of the PayClaim should not be after the

A. Khoja et al.

due date of the TransferClaim, which is tested by checking the satisfiability of
the formula ΦPrecede_Transfer_Pay:

ΦPrecede_Transfer_Pay ≡ 𝜙owner ∧ 𝜙Pay ∧ 𝜙Transfer ∧ dTransfer < dPay .

(29)

Applying the analysis to the pretzel bakery SPA example, the constraint which
indicates that there is no such inconsistency between the TransferClaim and
the PayClaim. By changing the due date of the payment to 29, ΦPrecede_Transfer_Pay
becomes satisfiable with dTransfer = 28 and dPay = 29, which means that an inconsistency has been detected.
Limitation analysis The due date and limitation of a claim can refer to other time
events in the contract. In the pretzel bakery SPA, for instance, the DueDate of
Claim1 is +28. The relative time reference means that Claim1 has to be fulfilled
within 28 days after the assert date dg of PretzelWarranty.
The combination of several due dates and limitations can result in an inconsistency
where, because of its limitation date, the due date of a claim is later than the date at
which the claim expires. Analysis ΦLimitation_c checks this inconsistency for every
claim c ∈ C with a Limitation. For this analysis, we need to (textually) substitute
c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dc ≤ c.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗 by c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dc, which we indicate by the notation c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dc ∕c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 and the enclosure of the formula to which the substitution applies in squared backets:

ΦLimitation_c ≡ 𝜙SPA [c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dc ∕c.𝙳𝚞𝚎𝙳𝚊𝚝𝚎 ≤ dc ≤ c.𝙻𝚒𝚖𝚒𝚝𝚊𝚝𝚒𝚘𝚗]
(30)
∧ c.Limitation < c.DueDate.
In the bakery SPA, only the claims Claim1 and Claim2 contain a Trigger
to PretzelWarranty and a Limitation of 70 days. Hence, the limitation
analysis is only created for these two claims. The SMT solver Z3, invoked by ContractCheck, computes that ΦLimitation_Claim1 is unsatisfiable, which entails that the
time constraints are consistent. For ΦLimitation_Claim2, Z3 computes a model that, for
instance, contains the following assignments: dClaim1 = −1, dPretzelWarranty = 30 and
dClaim2 = 71. With this contract execution, illustrated by the Sequence Diagram in
Fig. 7, Chris asserts the PretzelWarranty on day 29, then Eva tries to perform
Claim1 for 28 days but fails. Now, Eva has to pay a compensation that is due after
another 14 days. In summary, the compensation claim is due after 71 days, even
though, due to the Limitation, the legal basis of the claim is outdated after 70
days. This shows that there is an inconsistency in the timing between the due dates
and the Limitation of the PretzelWarranty.

Fig. 7  Sequence diagram
computed by ContractCheck
illustrating a limitation error

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

Fig. 8  ContractCheck analysis workflow, modeled using the BPMN notation (Object Management Group
2014)

6 The ContractCheck tool
6.1 ContractCheck workflow
An SPA is usually formulated in natural language and not formalized. Natural Language Processing to automatically obtain a semantic model of the SPA is beyond
the scope of this paper. Instead, we provide a collection of parameterized structured
English text blocks to the user that can be selected and properly parameterized in
order to reflect the meaning of the SPA to be analyzed. The ContractCheck (CCT,
2024) tool for the consistency analysis of SPAs that we describe in this section
parses these text blocks and translates them into an internal formal representation.
In doing so, it gives these text blocks a formal semantics. This relieves the user from
the task to provide a semantics, and thereby a formalization, in a manual fashion.
The workflow of the tool ContractCheck is depicted in the diagram in Fig. 8.
After the user has selected and parameterized the text blocks, ContractCheck will
compile a UML object diagram from the text blocks and the information regarding the class structure encoded in the SPA class diagram (see Fig. 3). Note that the
object diagram merely serves as an internal representation and does not need to be
edited by the user. ContractCheck extracts the formal representation of the SPA to
be analyzed from the object diagram and synthesizes the logical constraints that we
presented in Sect. 4 in smtlib2-format. Next, ContractCheck invokes the Z3 SMT
solver to perform the consistency analyses described in Sect. 5. Finally, ContractCheck translates the analysis results computed by Z3 into user-readable format and produces the results in its user interface.
6.2 Text blocks in ContractCheck
In ContractCheck, text blocks serve to capture the semantics of the different clauses
in an SPA in a structured fashion. Figure 9 gives an excerpt of the text block that

Fig. 9  Excerpt from text block encoding of Bakery SPA in JSON format

A. Khoja et al.

represents a portion of the clause 1.1 of the pretzel bakery SPA that can be found in
full length in the “Appendix”. A text block has a unique identifier (ID) that allows
one to refer to it. The Text field contains a parameterized structured natural language
description of the legal content of the contract clause that the text block represents.
The Object field provides references to the objects that the text block is parameterized with. The Assignment field gives concrete values for the object parameters that
are referenced in the text block. The information contained in the Object and Assignment fields is then used by ContractCheck to compile the object diagram used as an
internal semi-formal representation of the SPA, c.f. Fig. 5.
More concretely, the text block with the ID Block1 given in Fig. 9 defines the
essential components of an SPA: A seller, a purchaser, the shares to be sold and a
price. The $-character in the text indicates the assignment of a variable value, such
as the attribute Name for a person. For instance, the assignment to $seller.name is
currently Eva, as defined in the Assignment section of the block. A block may reference the variables of another block by using the $-character. For instance, $Block1_
share refers to the variable share in Block1. The instance Bakery of type Shares is
defined in another block. The inter-block reference semantics is necessary to assign
$Block1_share to the attribute Property of Bakery.
We envision two usage scenarios for ContractCheck, see also Fig. 1. One scenario is based on the idea that a comprehensive library of text blocks will be developed, so that existing textual SPAs can be manually mapped to blocks chosen from
this library. The parameters of the text blocks will then be filled with concrete values
from the textual contract at the time when this mapping is performed. This modeling
step is supported by the user interface of ContractCheck. The second scenario is
based on the idea that the contract will be defined using a set of text blocks from the
library that represents the clauses and stipulations of the SPA. A contract text can
then be synthesized by ContractCheck as a by-product of the analysis. This second
scenario fits well into the increasingly popular use of contract synthesis or generation tools in legal practice. The consistency analysis performed by ContractCheck is
agnostic with respect to the use of either of these two usage scenarios.
6.3 ContractCheck analysis result presentation
The analysis results are displayed in the user interface of ContractCheck. The results
of the Analyses I and II and the further dynamic analyses are either satisfying models, which provide value assignments to the logical variables which render the analysis problem satisfiable, or unsatisfiability cores which give value assignments that
render the analysis problem unsatisfiable.
In case a satisfying model is returned, the valuations of the variables in the model
indicate possible dates in which claims in the contract are executed. ContractCheck depicts such a satisfying model by a sequence diagram. For the bakery SPA, a
computed execution is depicted in Fig. 10. It indicates that the TransferClaim
is unperformed by Eva, the PretzelWarranty is performed by her, Chris performs the PayClaim on day 28 after signing, and is compensated for this payment
by a Restitution on day 29. This execution scenario illustrates that the contract

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	
Fig. 10  Bakery SPA execution
visualized in the form of a UML
sequence diagram

can be executed in spite of the inconsistency regarding the ownership of the bakery,
which means that the primary claims cannot be executed.
In case the SMT analysis invoked by ContractCheck returns a result of unsatisfiability of the constraint system, an unsatisfiability core will be returned. It contains a
maximum number of conjunctively connected logical constraints so that any true subset
of it is still satisfiable. The constraints contained in the unsatisfiability core are associated with certain text blocks, which ContractCheck “red flags” and draws side by
side in the user interface, as shown in Fig. 11. In this case, the ContractCheck analysis
result reveals the contradiction between the claimed pretzel bakery ownership by Eva in
Block1, and the stated transfer of the pretzel bakery ownership to the bank in Block 11.
These are the text blocks that created a set of unsatisfiable constraints contained in the
unsatisfiability core of ΦTransferClaim. The depicted claims help the user to identify the
claims that contradict each other and, hence, to “debug” the considered SPA.
In order to test our approach, we created an instance of the Bakery example without inconsistencies. Namely, the bank is no longer owner of the bakery and we also
set the warranty to a limitation of 56 days. The tool does not find any inconsistency
and depicts the execution in Fig. 12.

Fig. 11  Inconsistent output for the Bakery SPA

Fig. 12  Execution of the Bakery SPA without inconsistencies

A. Khoja et al.

7 Case study
To evaluate ContractCheck on an SPA of realistic size we have applied it to a
slightly modified version of an SPA-template taken from Meyer-Sparenberg
(2022b). This contract template is bilingual in German and English. It consists of
twelve paragraphs. The combined German and English text spans 21 pages of a
Word document and contains about 11.300 words.
We used Meyer-Sparenberg’s original template as a starting point and adapted
it by incorporating provisions commonly found in a wide range of standard contracts, which yielded the contract text that we use as a case study in this section.
To identify these common clauses, we reviewed the sample contracts provided in
the form books (von Hoyenberg 2020a, b; Meyer-Sparenberg 2022a, b; Pfisterer
2022; Seibt 2018a; Seibt 2018; Seibt 2018c, d). A quantitative analysis based on
matching headings in the case study contract to headings in the form book sample
contracts revealed that the clauses included in the case study contract also appear
in between 75% and 100% of the contracts provided by the considered form
books. It is safe to assume that a large portion of the SPAs used in practice are
based on these form book samples, because, to our knowledge, these form books
are the most commonly used in practice in Germany. We consequently assume
that our case study reflects a wide range of standard clauses and provisions, making it a representative test case for ContractCheck.
In order to be able to analyze the capabilities of ContractCheck to detect
inconsistencies in contract texts it is necessary to seed inconsistencies into these
texts (Jia and Harman 2011). In particular, the following five inconsistencies were
seeded:
(a) The contract states that the seller owns 100% of the company shares, but a warranty clause was modified to state that the seller owns only 90% of the shares.
This creates an inconsistency between the actual share ownership specified and
what is warranted.
(b) The minimal compensation of a compensation claim is 20.000€. The sum of all
compensations is restricted by a limitation of liabilities to 1% of the purchase
price of 1.800.000. As a consequence, no compensation can ever be paid.
(c) A clause was added stating that non-existing real estate properties used by the
company have no third party rights. However, the contract specifies that the
company owns no real estate property, so this clause is inconsistent.
(d) The clause regulating payment of an additional purchase price upon adoption of
the company’s annual financial statements was modified to remove the requirement that the statements be transmitted to the seller. This creates a potential
inconsistency where payment could become due before the seller receives the
statements.
(e) The effective date for accrual of interest on the purchase price was falsely specified as a date that comes after the stipulated latest possible closing date. This
results in an impossibility where interest would accrue after the date the price is
paid.

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	
Table 1  Quantitative experimental results for the analysis of a realistic size contract
Analysis

#Err/#An

Time

Memory

#Var

#Con

Contract Executability ( II )

0/ 1

0.030s

3.17MB

141

491

Claim Consistency ( I )

5/47

0.005s

1.45MB

21

48

Claim Unsatisfiable

1/47

0.022s

3.02MB

138

312

Claim Defense

1/ 1

0.002s

1.32MB

19

30

Limitation Check

1/13

0.017s

3.16MB

141

495

Maximal result values for individual analyses in each of the analysis categories (rows)

As we shall illustrate next, all of these seeded faults can be detected by ContractCheck using one of the defined semantic consistency analyses.
Analysis results We have applied the analyses implemented in LegalCheck to the
inconsistency-seeded realistic size SPA contract described above. From a qualitative
perspective, all seeded inconsistencies were detected by LegalCheck.
An overview of the quantitative results can be seen in Table 1. For the different
types of analyses mentioned in column Analysis, ContractCheck created a number
#An of SMT analyses, and found a number #Err of errors in the SPA. A particular
type of consistency analysis encoded as an SMT problem contains at most a number #Var of variables and #Con of constraints. In other words, these two columns
indicate the maximum size of a constraint system solved by the SMT solver in any
problem in a particular row of the table. For each type of analysis, the column Time
indicates the maximum computation time and the column Memory the maximum
amount of consumed main memory that it took to check satisfiability of any problem
in that row of the table.
The analysis type Contract Executability (Analysis II) returned one execution of
the SPA which shows that the SPA is executable. The analysis type Claim Consistency (Analysis I) created 47 SMT satisfiability analysis problems and succeeded
in detecting the seeded error a and 4 compensation claims that can never be paid
because of the seeded inconsistency b. The analysis type Claim Unsatisfiable created 47 SMT satisfiability analysis problems and succeeded in detecting the seeded
error c. The analysis type Claim Defense created 1 SMT satisfiability analysis problems and succeeded in detecting the seeded error d. The analysis type Limitation
Check created 13 SMT satisfiability analysis problems and succeeded in detecting
the seeded error e. For every analysis, the memory demand of the SMT-solver was
below 3.17MB, and satisfiability was decided within at most 30ms. These results
show that our encoding of the logical conditions allows for an efficient SMT-based
satisfiability analysis for SPAs of realistic size.
In conclusion, the case study shows that the proposed method is effective, i.e.,
that it finds inconsistencies in a more complex contract, and that is its efficient, i.e.,
that the formalization and the SMT solving scale to a contract of more realistic size
and complexity.

A. Khoja et al.

8 Threats to validity
We view the following points as main threats to the validity of our results:
• It is possible that there are mismatches between the intended semantics of a con-

tract text and the semantics entailed by our formalization. We believe that such
a mismatch is rather unlikely since the formalizations of the different types of
claims have been carefully reviewed by the legal experts in the author team of
this paper.
• There is a chance that the reasoning engine used in our paper is inconsistent.
Again, the chances of this happening are rather low since the Z3 SMT solver that
we use is in heavy academic and industrial use, for instance within Microsoft
Corp. (Bjørner 2018), and can consequently be considered to be well tested and
stable.
• It may be that the set of blocks that we propose in this paper does not correspond
well to the types of stipulations encountered in practical use, i.e., that our blocks
do not generalize well. As we argue in Sect. 7, the clauses used in our case study
of complex contracts generalize well to a large set of sample contracts from form
books widely used in practice in Germany. We maintain that this implies that a
fair number of blocks that we developed for our case studies can be reused in the
formalization of a large number of SPAs that can be found in practice.
• At this point it is unknown which portion of the types of stipulations that occur
in practical contracts are covered by the blocks for which we have proposed a
formalization and an analysis. We assume that over time a large library of reusable blocks will be developed so that coverage will steadily increase. Notice that
we do not claim completeness in the sense that all inconsistencies in a given SPA
contract text will be identified – we merely stipulate that our analysis is complete
with respect to the set of blocks used in the analysis of a given contract and the
formalizations proposed for this set of blocks.

9 Conclusion
We have presented a method for the logical modeling and consistency analysis of
legal contracts using an SPA as an example. We provided an ontology for SPAs
using UML class diagrams and illustrated the refinement of this ontology to a UML
object diagram as a case study. We discussed the logical formalization of the SPA
using decidable fragments of FOL via SMT solving. Finally, we introduced the tool
ContractCheck, which allows the textual editing of contracts using building blocks,
performs the automated derivation of the logical encoding of the contract and the
consistency conditions, invokes the Z3 SMT solver, and returns the analysis results
to the user. We have evaluated the consistency analyses that ContractCheck can perform on an SPA of realistic size and noted that significant seeded inconsistencies in
the contract could be discovered.

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	

Future research will increase the size and complexity of the contract artifacts that
we consider. We will further develop the analysis of the dynamic execution of contracts by introducing state-machine models, among other things, in order to assess
the benefits of the contract for different contracting parties in the light of the possible dynamic execution scenarios. We are also currently working on an approach
relying on machine-learning based Natural Language Processing that automatically
maps natural language SPA texts to the blocks that we describe in this paper.
We see this work as an innovative contribution to improving the quality of complex legal artifacts using logic-based, automated analysis methods.

Appendix
Text of the Pretzel Bakery SPA
§1 Main Content
1.1 The Seller Eva hereby sells the shares of Bakery AG with all rights and
obligations pertaining thereto (including the dividend right for the current
financial year), to the Purchaser Chris who accepts such sale.
1.2 The Purchaser pays the purchase price 40.000€ to the Seller.
1.3 If the transfer is not performed, the Purchaser has the right to withdraw.
1.4 If the payment is not performed, the Seller has the right to withdraw.
§2 The Seller hereby represents and warrants to the Purchaser in the form of an
independent guarantee pursuant to Section 311 (1) of the German Civil Code and
exclusively in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement that the following
statements (the “Warranties”) are true and correct as of the date of this agreement
and that the Warranties set forth in this paragraph will also be true and correct as
of the Closing Date:
2.1 The company can produce at least the 10.000 of Pretzels every day (Pretzel
Warranty). In case of the breach of the Warranty, it needs to be asserted
within 14 days.
§3 The Purchaser’s rights arising from any inaccuracy of any of the Warranties
contained in §1 shall be limited to supplementary performance claims and compensation claims against the Seller, subject to the provisions of
3.1 In case the Pretzel Warranty is not met and then the creditor may demand
subsequent performance within 28 business days from the debtor after having
transfered the shares.
3.2 In case the Pretzel Warranty is not met and the damage is above 1.000€ then
a compensation of 100€ per 100 pretzels not baked pretzels is paid within 14
business days.
§4 Claims of §3 expire after 42 business days.

A. Khoja et al.

§5 The Bakery AG is transferred by way of security to Bank B.
Text blocks for the Pretzel Bakery SPA
ID:

Block1

Text:

The seller $seller.Name hereby sells shares of $shares.Name, with all rights and obligations pertaining thereto (including the dividend right for the current financial year), to
the Purchaser $purchaser.Name, who accepts such sale.

Object:

"spa:SPA", "seller:Person", "purchaser:Person", "shares:Shares", "transfer:PrimaryClaim"

Assignment: "purchaser.Name=Chris", "seller.Name=Eva", "spa.Seller=$seller", "spa.
Purchaser=$purchaser", "shares.Name=Bakery AG", "spa.Object=$shares",
"spa.Claim=$transfer", "spa.Closing=28", "transfer.Performance=Bakery.
transfer($purchaser)", "transfer.Debtor=$seller", "transfer.Creditor=$purchaser", "transfer.DueDate=28"
ID:

Block2

Text:

The purchaser pays the purchase price $price.Amount € to the seller on date $payment.
DueDate.

Object:

"spa:$SPA", "price:PurchasePrice", "payment:PrimaryClaim"

Assignment: "spa=$Block1_spa", "spa.Price=$price", "price.Amount=40000", "payment.
Debtor=Block1_Purchaser", "spa.Claim=$payment", "payment.Creditor=Block1_
Seller", "payment.DueDate=28", "payment.Performance=price.transfer($seller)"
ID:

Block3

Text:

If the $claim is not performed, the $withdraw.Creditor has the right to withdraw.

Object:

"claim:$Claim", "withdraw:RestitutionClaim"

Assignment: "claim=$Block1_transfer", "withdraw.Name=Restitution Purchaser", "withdraw.
Trigger=$claim", "withdraw.Debtor=$claim.Creditor", "withdraw.Creditor=$claim.
Debtor"
ID:

Block4

Text:

If the $claim is not performed, the $withdraw.Creditor has the right to withdraw.

Object:

"claim:$Claim", "withdraw:RestitutionClaim"

Assignment: "claim=$Block2_payment", "withdraw.Name=Restitution Seller", "withdraw.
Trigger=$claim", "withdraw.Debtor=$claim.Creditor", "withdraw.Creditor=$claim.
Debtor"
ID:

Block5

Text:

The Seller hereby represents and warrants to the Purchaser in the form of an independent guarantee pursuant to Section 311 (1) of the German Civil Code and exclusively
in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement that the following statements (the
“Warranties”) are true and correct as of the date of this Agreement and that the Warranties set forth in this paragraph will also be true and correct as of the Closing Date:

ID:

Block6

Text:

The company can produce at least the $amount of $thing every day. In case of the breach
of the warranty, it needs to be asserted within $warranty.Limitation days.

Object:

"warranty:WarrantyClaim", "count:Integer", "amount:Integer", "thing:String"

Assignment: "warranty.Name=PretzelWarranty", "warranty.Debtor=$Block1_seller", "warranty.
DueDate=$Block1_spa.Closing", "thing=Pretzels", "warranty.Creditor=$Block1_purchaser", "warranty.Limitation = +14", "warranty.Performance=(Block6_count=Block6_
amount)", "amount=10000", "Block1_spa.Claim=$warranty"
ID:

Block7

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	
ID:

Block1

Text:

The Purchaser’s rights arising from any inaccuracy of any of the Warranties contained in
$block shall be limited to supplementary performance claims and compensation claims
against the Seller, subject to the provisions of

Object:

"claim:$Claim", "per:PerformanceClaim", "block:$Block"

Assignment: "block=$Block6", “claim=$Block6_warranty", “per.Trigger=$claim", “per.
Name=Claim1", “per.DueDate=+28", “per.Debtor=$claim.Debtor", “per.
Creditor=$claim.Creditor"
ID:

Block8

Text:

In case the $claim is not met and then the creditor may demand subsequent performance
within $per.DueDate business days from the debtor after having transfered the shares.

Object:

"claim:$Claim", "per:PerformanceClaim"

Assignment: “claim=$Block6_warranty", "per.Name=Claim1", "per.Trigger=$claim", "per.DueDate=+28", "per.Performance=$claim.Performance", "per.Debtor=$claim.Debtor",
"per.Creditor=$claim.Creditor"
ID:

Block9

Text:

In case the $claim is not met and the damage is above $comp.Min €then a compensation
$claim.Performance is paid within $comp.DueDate days.

Object:

"claim:$Claim", "comp:CompensationClaim"

Assignment: “claim=$Block6_warranty", "comp.Name=Claim2", "comp.Min=1000", "comp.
DueDate=+42","comp.Trigger=$claim", "comp.Compensation=((Block6_amountBlock6_count)/100)*1000", "comp.Debtor=$claim.Debtor", "comp.Creditor=$claim.
Creditor"
ID:

Block10

Text:

Claims in $block expire after $d business days.

Objects:

"claim:$Claim", "d:Date", "block:Block"

Assignment: “block=Block8", “d=28+42", “${//$block//Claim}.Limitation=$d"
ID:

Block11

Text:

The $object is transferred by way of security to $owner.Name.

Objects:

"owner:Person", "object:$Object", "prop:PropertyRight"

Assignment: "owner.Name=Bank", "object=$Block1_shares", "prop.Owner=$owner", "prop.
Property=$object"
Acknowledgements We wish to thank Raffael Senn and David Boetius for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.
Author contribution Martin Kölbl: The majority of this author’s contributions were made while affiliated
with the University of Konstanz.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.

Declarations
Conflict of interest None of the authors has any conflict of interest related to the research results documented in this manuscript. No extra-mural funds, grants, or other support was received. The research was
entirely funded by government operating funds of the Unviersity of Konstanz. The code of the ContractCheck software tool is publicly available, as cited in the manuscript.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License,
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long

A. Khoja et al.
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line
to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.

References
(2025) Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch, German Civil Code
(2024) ContractCheck. https://​github.​com/​sen-​uni-​kn/​Contr​actCh​eck
Alpern B, Schneider FB (1987) Recognizing safety and liveness. Distrib Comput 2(3):117–126. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1007/​BF017​82772
Balbiani P, Broersen JM, Brunel J (2009) Decision procedures for a deontic logic modeling temporal
inheritance of obligations. Electron Notes Theor Comput Sci 231:69–89. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
entcs.​2009.​02.​030
Barrett C, Fontaine P, Tinelli C (2021) The SMT-LIB standard version 2.6. https://​smtlib.​cs.​uiowa.​edu/​
papers/​smt-​lib-​refer​ence-​v2.6-​r2021-​05-​12.​pdf
Bjørner NS (2009) SMT solvers for testing, program analysis and verification at microsoft. In: SYNASC.
IEEE Computer Society, p 15
Bjørner NS (2018) Z3 and SMT in industrial R &D. In: FM, Lecture notes in computer science, vol
10951. Springer, pp 675–678
Boley H, Paschke A, Shafiq MO (2010) Ruleml 1.0: the overarching specification of web rules. In:
Dean M, Hall J, Rotolo A et al (eds) RuleML 2010: semantic web rules. International symposium.
Springer, pp 162–178. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​642-​16289-3_​15
Bonifácio AL, Mura W (2021) Automatically running experiments on checking multi-party contracts.
Artif Intell Law 29(3):287–310. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s10506-​020-​09276-y
Braegelmann T, Kaulartz M (2019) Rechtshandbuch smart contracts. C.H. Beck
Camilleri JJ, Schneider G (2017) Modelling and analysis of normative documents. J Log Algebraic Methods Program 91:33–59. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jlamp.​2017.​05.​002
Castro PF, Maibaum TSE (2007) A complete and compact propositional deontic logic. In: Jones CB, Liu
Z, Woodcock J (eds) ICTAC 2007: theoretical aspects of computing. Springer, pp 109–123. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​540-​75292-9_8
Castro PF, Maibaum TSE (2008) A tableaux system for deontic action logic. In: Meyden R, Torre L (eds)
DEON 2008: Deontic logic in computer science. 9th international conference. Springer, pp 34–48.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​540-​70525-3_4
Clarke EM, Henzinger TA, Veith H et al (2018) Handbook of model checking. Springer. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1007/​978-3-​319-​10575-8
Coates JC (2016) M &A contracts: purposes, types, regulation, and patterns of practice. In: Hill CA,
Solomon SD (eds) Research handbook on mergers and acquisitions, pp 29–65
Crafa S, Laneve C, Sartor G et al (2023) Pacta sunt servanda: legal contracts in stipula. Sci Comput Program 225(102):911. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​scico.​2022.​102911
de Moura LM, Bjørner N (2008) Z3: an efficient SMT solver. In: TACAS, Lecture notes in computer science, vol 4963. Springer, pp 337–340. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​540-​78800-3_​24
Desai N, Narendra NC, Singh MP (2008) Checking correctness of business contracts via commitments.
In: Padgham L, Parkes D, Müller J et al (eds) AAMAS ’08: proceedings of the 7th international
joint conference on autonomous agents and multiagent systems, vol 2, pp 787–794. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​5555/​14022​98.​14023​33
Engers T, Gerrits R, Boekenoogen M et al (2001) POWER: using UML/OCL for modeling legislation—
an application report. In: 8th international conference on artificial intelligence and law. Association
for Computing Machinery, pp 157–167. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​383535.​383554
Faciano C, Mera S, Schapachnik F et al (2017) Performance improvement on legal model checking. In:
Governatori G, Keppens J (eds) ICAIL ’17: proceedings of the 16th edition of the international conference on articial intelligence and law. ACM, pp 59–68. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​30865​12.​30865​18

Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts﻿	
Gorín D, Mera S, Schapachnik F (2010) Model checking legal documents. In: JURIX, Frontiers in artificial intelligence and applications, vol 223. IOS Press, pp 151–154. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5555/​19405​
59.​19405​82
Gorín D, Mera S, Schapachnik F (2011) A software tool for legal drafting. In: FLACOS, pp 71–86.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​4204/​EPTCS.​68.7
Governatori G, Wong M (2023) Defeasible semantics for l4. https://​doi.​org/​10.​13140/​RG.2.​2.​27931.​
34089
Grupp M (2018) Wie baut man einen Rechtsautomaten? In: Hartung M, Bues MM, Halbleib G (eds)
Legal Technique. C.H. Beck, pp 259–266
Henglein F, Larsen CK, Murawska A (2020) A formally verified static analysis framework for compositional contracts. In: Financial cryptography workshops, lecture notes in computer science, vol
12063. Springer, pp 599–619. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​54455-3_​42
Hildebrandt T, Mukkamala RR, Slaats T (2012) Nested dynamic condition response graphs. In: Arbab
F, Sirjani M (eds) Fundamentals of software engineering. 4th IPM international conference, FSEN
2011, pp 343–350. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​642-​29320-7_​23
Hvitved T, Klaedtke F, Zalinescu E (2012) A trace-based model for multiparty contracts. J Log Algebraic
Methods Program 81(2):72–98. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jlap.​2011.​04.​010
Jia Y, Harman M (2011) An analysis and survey of the development of mutation testing. IEEE Trans
Software Eng 37(5):649–678. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​TSE.​2010.​62
Kabilan V (2005) Contract workflow model patterns using BPMN. In: Halpin TA, Siau K, Krogstie J
(eds) Proceedings of the 10th international workshop on exploring modeling methods for systems
analysis and design, EMMSAD 2005, pp 171–182
Kabilan V, Johannesson P (2003) Semantic representation of contract knowledge using multi tier ontology. In: Cruz IF, Kashyap V, Decker S et al (eds) Proceedings of SWDB’03, the first international
workshop on semantic web and databases, co-located with VLDB 2003. Humboldt-Universität, Berlin, Germany, September 7–8, 2003, pp 395–414. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5555/​28899​05.​28899​30
Kennedy D, Fisher WW (eds) (2007) Wesley Hohfeld, some fundamental legal conceptions as applied in
judicial reasoning, 23 Yale Law Journal 16 (1913), Princeton University Press, Princeton, pp 45–82.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1515/​97806​91186​429-​004
Khoja A, Kölbl M, Leue S et al (2022a) Automated consistency analysis for legal contracts. In:
SPIN, Lecture notes in computer science, vol 13255. Springer, pp 1–23. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
978-3-​031-​15077-7_1
Khoja A, Kölbl M, Leue S et al (2022b) Formal modeling and analysis of legal contracts using contractcheck. arXiv:​ org/​abs/​2212.​03349
Kroening D, Strichman O (2016) Decision procedures—an algorithmic point of view, 2nd edn.
Texts in theoretical computer science. An EATCS series. Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
978-3-​662-​50497-0
Madaan N, Krishna PR, Karlapalem K (2014) Consistency detection in e-contract documents. In: ICEGOV. ACM, pp 267–274. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​26911​95.​26912​49
Martínez E, Díaz G, Cambronero M et al (2010) A model for visual specification of e-contracts. In: IEEE
SCC. IEEE Computer Society, pp 1–8. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​SCC.​2010.​32
McNamara P, Van De Putte F (2022) Deontic logic. In: Zalta EN, Nodelman U (eds) The stanford encyclopedia of philosophy, fall, 2022nd edn. Stanford University, Metaphysics Research Lab
Merigoux D, Chataing N, Protzenko J (2021) Catala: a programming language for the law. In: ICFP 2021.
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​34735​82
Meyer-Sparenberg W (2022a) Form. iii. a. 16. unternehmenskaufvertrag (gmbh-anteile) – käuferfreundlich. In: Gebele A, Scholz KS (eds) Beck’sches Formularbuch Bürgerliches, Handels- und
Wirtschaftsrecht. C.H. Beck
Meyer-Sparenberg W (2022b) Form. iii. a. 17. unternehmenskaufvertrag (gmbh-anteile) – verkäuferfreundlich. In: Gebele A, Scholz KS (eds) Beck’sches Formularbuch Bürgerliches, Handels- und
Wirtschaftsrecht. C.H. Beck
Mitra S, Anand K, Chittimalli PK (2018) Identifying anomalies in sbvr-based business rules using
directed graphs and smt-libv2. In: ICEIS (2), pp 215–222
Mura WAD, Bonifácio AL (2015) Devising a conflict detection method for multi-party contracts. In:
SCCC. IEEE, pp 1–6. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​SCCC.​2015.​74165​74
OASIS Standard (2021) LegalRuleML, version 1.0. https://​docs.​oasis-​open.​org/​legal​ruleml/​legal​ruleml-​
core-​spec/​v1.0/​os/​legal​ruleml-​core-​spec-​v1.0-​os.​pdf

A. Khoja et al.
Object Management Group (2014) Business process model and notation. https://​www.​omg.​org/​spec/​
BPMN
Object Management Group (2017) Unified modelling language, Specification 2.5.1. http://​www.​omg.​org/​
spec/​UML
Oetker H, Maultzsch F (2018) Vertragliche schuldverhältnisse, 5th edn. Springer, Berlin, pp 17–301
Paal BP, Fries M (2019) Smart contracts. Mohr Siebeck
Pace GJ, Prisacariu C, Schneider G (2007) Model checking contracts—a case study. In: ATVA,
Lecture notes in computer science, vol 4762. Springer, pp 82–97. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
978-3-​540-​75596-8_8
Palmirani M, Governatori G, Rotolo A et al (2011) Legalruleml: Xml-based rules and norms. In: RuleML
America, Lecture notes in computer science, vol 7018. Springer, pp 298–312. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1007/​978-3-​642-​24908-2_​30
Pfisterer B (2022) Share deal. In: Weise S, Krauß HF (eds) Beck’sche Online-Formulare. C.H. Beck
Prisacariu C, Schneider G (2012) A dynamic deontic logic for complex contracts. J Log Algebraic Methods Program 81(4):458–490. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jlap.​2012.​03.​003
Prisacariu C, Schneider G (2007) A formal language for electronic contracts. In: FMOODS, Lecture
notes in computer science, vol 4468. Springer, pp 174–189. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​540-​
72952-5_​11
Schumann G, Gómex JM (2024) Detection of conflicts, contradictions and inconsistencies in regulatory
documents: a literature review. In: 2024 Fifth international conference on intelligent data science
technologies and applications (IDSTA). IEEE, pp 81–88
Seibt CH (2018a) GmbH-Anteilskaufvertrag - ausführlich, käuferfreundlich. In: Beck’sches Formularbuch Mergers & acquisitions. C.H. Beck, pp 324–456
Seibt CH (2018c) GmbH-Anteilskaufvertrag - knapp, ausgewogen. In: Beck’sches Formularbuch Mergers
& Acquisitions. C.H. Beck, pp 515–525
Seibt CH (2018d) GmbH-Anteilskaufvertrag - knapp, verkäuferfreundlich. In: Beck’sches Formularbuch
Mergers & Acquisitions. C.H. Beck, pp 457–514
Seibt CH (2018) GmbH-Anteilskaufvertrag - ausführlich, verkäuferfreundlich, deutsch. Beck’sches Formularbuch Mergers & Acquisitions. C.H. Beck, München, pp 233–323
van Binsbergen LT, Liu LC, van Doesburg R et al (2020) eFLINT: a domain-specific language for executable norm specifications. In: Erwig M, Gray J (eds) Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN international conference on generative programming: concepts and experiences, pp 124–136. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1145/​34258​98.​34269​58
Van Doesburg R, Van Der Storm T, Van Engers T (2016) Calculemus: towards a formal language for the
interpretation of normative systems. Artif Intell Justice 1:73
von Hoyenberg P (2020) Share deal (GmbH, fester Kaufpreis). In: Weipert L, Arnhold P, Baltus M (eds)
Münchener Vertragshandbuch. C.H. Beck, pp 228–233
von Hoyenberg P (2020) Share deal (GmbH, mit Stichtagsbilanzierung). In: Weipert L, Arnhold P, Baltus
M (eds) Münchener Vertragshandbuch. Beck-online Bücher. C.H. Beck, pp 203–227
Von Wright GH (1951) Deontic logic. Mind 60(237):1–15. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​mind/​LX.​237.1
Wan F, Singh MP (2005) Formalizing and achieving multiparty agreements via commitments. In:
AAMAS, pp 770–777. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1145/​10824​73.​10825​91
Wilhelmi R (2023) Vor §903. In: Westermann HP, Grunewald B, Maier-Raimer G (eds) Erman BGB.
Otto Schmidt
Wilhelmi R (2024a) §453. In: Gsell B, Krüger W, Lorenz S et al (eds) Beck’scher Online Großkommentar. C.H. Beck, pp 290–295
Wilhelmi R (2024b) §453. In: Gsell B, Krüger W, Lorenz S et al (eds) Beck’scher Online Großkommentar. C.H. Beck, pp 505–514
Wilhelmi R (2024c) §453. In: Gsell B, Krüger W, Lorenz S et al (eds) Beck’scher Online Großkommentar. C.H. Beck, pp 744–782
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
and institutional affiliations.

