Reflections on the design, applications and implementations of the normative
specification language eFLINT
L. Thomas van Binsbergena , Christopher A. Esterhuysea , Tim Müllera
a Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, Science Park 900, 1098 XH, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Abstract

arXiv:2511.12276v3 [cs.SE] 4 Aug 2026

Checking the compliance of software against laws, regulations and contracts is increasingly important and costly as the
embedding of software into societal practices is becoming more pervasive. Moreover, the digitalised services provided by
governmental organisations and companies are governed by an increasing amount of laws and regulations, requiring highly
adaptable compliance practices. A potential solution is to automate compliance using software. However, automating
compliance is difficult for various reasons. Legal practices involve subjective processes such as interpretation and
qualification. New laws and regulations come into effect regularly and laws and regulations, as well as their interpretations,
are subjected to constant revision. In addition, computational reasoning with laws requires a cross-disciplinary process
involving both legal and software expertise.
This paper reflects on the domain-specific language eFLINT developed to experiment with novel solutions to these
challenges. Specifically, the language has been developed to experiment with the abstract syntax and semantics of
a language supporting different types of reasoning for various applications. The language combines declarative and
procedural elements, formalises connections between legal concepts and computational concepts, and is designed to
automate compliance checks before, during and after a software system runs. The various design goals and applications
areas for the language give rise to (conflicting) requirements. This paper presents and reflects on the current design
of the language by recalling applications and requirements. As such, this paper reports on results and insights of an
investigation that can benefit language developers within the field of automated compliance.
This is the arXiv version of the paper published by Elsevier under a modified title at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cola.2026.101411.

1. Introduction

Laws, regulations, contracts, and other social policies
serve to regulate social systems by establishing norms that
determine how actors within the system are expected to
behave. A wide range of automated techniques is available
to aid in the enforcement of such social policies within
software systems. In distributed software systems, system
policies are widespread as means to regulate the behaviour
of system components, separating the description of the
policy from the implementation of the components to enhance adaptability and transparency. For example, the
XACML access control language is designed to regulate
access to resources through access control policies that
can easily be reconfigured when relevant social policies
change [88]. As another example, contracts encode how
parties’ rights and obligations evolve over time in response
to events and can naturally be formalised as state machines.
Smart contracts implement such state machines to manage
the exchange of digital assets [108], akin to the automation
∗ Corresponding author

Email addresses: ltvanbinsbergen@acm.org (L. Thomas van
Binsbergen), c.a.esterhuyse@uva.nl (Christopher A. Esterhuyse),
t.muller@uva.nl (Tim Müller)

of the execution of a contract [54] without the need of an intermediary. However, both examples do not directly embed
normative concepts such as obligations and power, limiting
their expressivity with respect to social policies in general.
Moreover, there is still a significant conceptual gap between
the social policy text and its encoding in a smart contract
or access control policy. Existing languages that close this
gap by embedding normative concepts are designed for
specific subsets of the law. For example, Symboleo [105] is
used to formalise and execute contracts whereas Catala [83]
targets computational laws such as tax laws.
A general solution to automating compliance that is
tenable from the legal perspective needs to address several
requirements. Firstly, a formal representation of policies is
required that is sufficiently general to capture policies from
a variety of sources and at different levels of abstraction.
For example, the GDPR privacy regulation is more abstract
than an organisational policy or a data sharing agreement.
Secondly, the solution should enable different kinds of
reasoning. For example, conformance checking can be used
to determine whether an implemented process is compliant
with policies based on event logs [2]. Model checking [30]
can be used to gain confidence in the correctness of a
policy specification. Simulation helps determine the effects
enforcing specific policies on systems or their constituent

parts, including human stakeholders. Search can be used
for policy-aware planning and optimisation.
Thirdly, the solution should embrace the fact that legal processes, such as interpretation and qualification, are
inherently subjective, and that compliance depends on
(in)actions by users. These observations render it impossible, from a legal perspective, that a system can prevent
all violations by design without adaptation or response
mechanisms. This is due to the fact that: (a) the same
legal norm may be interpreted differently by different stakeholders, (b) conflicting legal norms may simultaneously
apply to a case, (c) norms may be interpreted differently
and situations may be qualified differently depending on
the specifics of a case, and (d) legal obligations may require
actions by users that cannot be technically enforced or are
not automatically enforced to preserve the users freedom of
choice. Therefore, solutions are needed in which violations
within the system can occur and can be observed, together
with penalty- or compensation-mechanisms to respond to
non-compliance. An extensive overview of the challenges
related to compliance is given by Hashmi et al. [58].
This paper reports on intermediate findings of an investigation into a general solution to automating compliance.
Central to the investigation is the design and implementation of eFLINT, a domain-specific language (DSL) for
developing executable specifications of norms [15]. The
language supports various types of reasoning and can be
applied at different stages in the software development process. The design is based on powerful software engineering
concepts such as modularity and extensibility and combines concepts from the declarative, logical, and imperative
programming paradigms. The language has been applied
in various experiments demonstrating: assessing individual
cases [15], bounded model checking [42], run-time compliance checking [81], normative multi-agent systems [91], and
generating access control policies from social policies [14].
Over time, the language has evolved to become more flexible and suitable for use within these various application
areas. However, the language is oriented towards software
experts and is not suitable for use by legal experts. Instead, the language is intended as an intermediate language
that can provide semantics to a surface language such as
FLINT [37, 22], for which it was first developed.
In this paper, we reflect on the design of the language
using requirements extracted from applications of the language. The reflection is based on 11 software systems that
incorporate eFLINT to reason about compliance. The
systems are developed by students, researchers and practitioners and demonstrate the effectiveness of the language
at various technological readiness levels. Each system provides either validation of the language in a lab environment
or in a realistic test environment with real stakeholder interactions. In one case, the system provides an operational
service maintained by an industrial partner. These validation experiments are reported in 8 peer reviewed papers,
two theses and one white paper (see Section 7). Through
these reflections, this paper is intended to be insightful for

researchers interested in legal DSLs, norm specification languages, normative reasoning, and automating compliance.
Specifically, this paper contributes:
• A list of requirements identified through a range of applications of the language such as static and dynamic
compliance checking, verification and planning.
• A definition of the latest version of the eFLINT language together with a reflection on the design decisions in relation to the identified requirements. This
paper is the first to define the language’s extension
with physical actions and open types.
• A runtime performance comparison between two implementations of the language: a bespoke reference
interpreter and an interpreter that employs Clingo’s
answer-set solving.
The development of the language went through various
phases during which additional applications were targetted
and requirements were identified. Rather than attempting to present these as isolated, well-defined phases, we
instead present the current design followed by a reflection on the language’s evolution, application areas and the
requirements identified along the way.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 motivates and gives a high-level overview of the background
concepts and terminology most influential on the design.
Section 3 introduces the language through a running example. Section 4 defines the abstract syntax and discusses
the semantics of the language as it exists today alongside a
brief overview of the evolution of the language. Section 5
analyses specific design decisions and trade-offs that have
been made to address requirements identified throughout
the language’s evolution. Section 6 motivates and compares
the two most prevalent implementations and includes a
runtime performance analysis. Section 7 discusses specific
experiments with the language in various application areas
that give evidence to the suitability and wide applicability
of the language. In doing so, Section 7 reflects on the
identified requirements, discusses the main limitations of
the current design, and suggests future directions. Related
work is discussed in Section 8 and Section 9 concludes.
2. Background
This section introduces the main concepts and terminology underpinning the design of eFLINT at a high-level
of abstraction. The section covers process modelling, logic
programming and norm representation.
2.1. Process Modelling
Process modelling languages show variety in the purposes for which they are developed and their visual or
notational style. For example, Business Process Model and
Notation (BPMN) is used to model business process using
flow-charts [1]. In the context of software engineering, the
2

activity diagrams of the Unified Modeling Language (UML)
are used to describe the behaviour of a system or system
component [80]. On the other hand, languages oriented
towards formal analysis, such as nuXmv [25] and Alloy [69],
tend to use a textual notation. Process modelling languages
have in common that their semantics can be expressed using event-based mathematical models involving states and
transitions. Examples are petri nets, automata and transition systems. The choice of semantic model may depend on
whether the modelled system has inherent concurrency or
parallelism. Another factor is whether the system can reach
infinitely many states or process infinitely many events.
The semantics of eFLINT is described in terms of transition systems in [15] and Section 4. This approach gives the
flexibility to a model a broad range of systems, including
systems with infinite, concurrent and bounded parallelism.
For bounded model checking, assumptions can be placed
on norm specifications to ensure the underlying transition
system has the required, finite structure [31]. Relevant
extensions to the semantics of eFLINT that have not yet
been considered include additional types of primitives beyond Booleans and integers, probabilistic reasoning and
continuous elements, e.g., to represent clocks.

checking verifies the conformance relation between event
logs and regulatory requirements at runtime.
Section 7 gives an overview of the experiments we performed to demonstrate the use of eFLINT for these types of
verification. In addition, we have demonstrated adaptability
of systems through the integration of eFLINT.
2.3. Runtime Integration
In runtime verification, a component or subsystem is
placed under monitoring [12]. The observed event traces
are compared to a behaviour specification typically comprised of a process model describing the intended/permitted behaviour. Such a behaviour specification can also
encode regulatory requirements [26]. Observed violations
can be used as input to a self-adapting system’s MAPE-K
loop [74, 20] or as part of norm revision [35].
In distributed data processing systems, orchestrators
assign tasks to worker nodes in fulfilment of a data processing workflow [110]. Orchestrators plan the workflow
by identifying and distributing tasks in adherence to given
constraints, which may include regulatory requirements.
In access control, data requests are intercepted to ensure
data is accessible only to actors with explicit authorization.
The XACML access control architecture [88] defines technical roles for administering, enforcing and deciding on access
control policies. The primary benefit of the separation is
that it gives system administrators the ability to update
policies without modifying the system’s implementation.
In our experiments, eFLINT is integrated in a system
by the implementation of an API for interacting with an
underlying eFLINT interpreter. In what follows, we refer
to a component implementing such an API as a reasoner.

2.2. Regulatory Compliance
In the context of business process modelling, Groefsema et al. define ‘verification relations’ for checking the
adherence of system designs and implementations with respect to different types of requirements [57]. In that work,
compliance is defined as a relation between a requirement
specification and the design of a system, captured by a process model. On the other hand, conformance is a relation
between the events logs produced by an enacted process
and a requirement specification or design model. These
relations are used to identify ‘verification techniques’ by
also considering the moment in the software development
lifecycle the checks are performed. The verification techniques that check adherence with regulatory requirements
are regulatory compliance checking and auditing.
Auditing is verifying the conformance relation between
event logs and a formal specification of the regulatory
requirements. Auditing is an after-the-fact (hereafter: expost) technique that is applied to complete event logs, typically from a certain time period. Process mining enables
the construction of a process model from the logs [111] as
a first step towards verifying the conformance relation.
Regulatory compliance checking has a static and dynamic counterpart. The static variant verifies the compliance relation between the model of a system design and
the regulatory requirements. Such a before-the-fact (hereafter: ex-ante) technique serves to prevent non-compliance
as much as possible. However, dynamic and ex-post techniques are needed in practice as checking the adherence
with certain regulatory requirements might require runtime information, e.g., about user actions and inactions.
Moreover, the regulatory requirements might themselves
be dynamic in nature. Dynamic regulatory compliance

2.4. Logic Programming
Process modelling is used by eFLINT to capture the
temporal evolution of the state of a system. To represent
information within the state, eFLINT relies on concepts familiar from logic programming. Specifically, the user defines
sets and relations with predicates determining for every
possible element whether it is present in the set/relation according to the current state. In this context, the state is also
referred to as a knowledge base. This style of knowledge representation is common in logic programming languages such
as Prolog [32], Clingo [48] and Datalog [27], and in ontology
languages such as OWL [63, 78] and RDF [75]. From this
paradigm, eFLINT has also adopted Horn-clauses; if-then
rules for deriving new predicate instances from existing
predicate instances. For example, the ‘counts as’ relation is
commonly used for sub-typing in ontological reasoning and
is easy to implement using eFLINT’s derivation rules. For
example, “if an object X is a car, then X is also a vehicle”:
Fact car
// a predicate recognising cars
Fact vehicle // a predicate recognising vehicles
Holds when car ( vehicle ) // cars ‘ count as ’ vehicles

The semantics of logic programming languages differ in
how they treat Horn-clauses. For example, Datalog places
3

a restriction on the usage of variables that makes it possible
to compute predicates efficiently. Prolog and Clingo are
more expressive and require more powerful solvers such as
Potassco for Clingo [50]. Especially relevant to this paper is
Clingo and its stable model semantics [51] that enables the
specific form of logical programming referred to as answerset programming (ASP) [38]. A solver for ASP searches for
all possible answers – sets of predicate instances that can
consistently hold simultaneously according to the clauses.
Negation is a well-studied challenge in logic programming [29]. The use of negation as failure within eFLINT
is discussed in detail in Section 5.3.
The event calculus [76, 99, 98, 28] has been studied
extensively as a way to admit temporal reasoning in logics. Its discrete timepoints and explicitly evolving truthassignment to predicate instances correspond naturally to a
transition system semantics in which timepoints correspond
to states. As predicate instances can evolve from being
true to false, the event calculus naturally gives rise to a
kind of defeasibility of facts, explored separately within
defeasible logics [87, 55]. In [42], the semantics of eFLINT
is formalised in terms of the event calculus on top of ASP.

Act frame
Actor
Object
Interested Party
...
Creating
postcondition
Terminates postcondition

«assisting with the contracting of a valid
marriage»
[ordinary or priest ...]
[marriage attempt]
[spouses]
...
[valid marriage]; ...
[marriage attempt]

Fact [ ordinary or priest ...]
Fact [ spouses ]
Bool [ marriage attempt ]
Bool [ valid marriage ]
Act << assisting with the contracting
of a valid marriage > >
Actor
[ ordinary or priest ...]
Recipient
[ spouses ]
Related to [ marriage attempt ]
Creates
[ valid marriage ]()
Terminates [ marriage attempt ]()

Figure 1: A FLINT and eFLINT specification of the same action-type
(Act). This simplified example is taken from [36].

physical reality
sources
of norms

2.5. Norm representation
An important distinction in normative languages is the
ability to separate between what can physically be achieved
and what is permitted by the norms, i.e., to separate ability
and permissibility. An additional separation is needed
between permissibility and the concept of institutional
power as formalised by Jones and Sergot [70]. In essence,
an actor can manifest a power by performing an action
that has normative implications, e.g., signing a purchase
agreement creates an obligation to pay. The absence of
a permission does not necessarily imply the absence of a
power [36]. An explicit goal for the design of eFLINT has
been to support both the concept of institutional power
and the deontic concepts of permission, prohibition and
obligation. In general terms, these concepts correspond
to those in the legal framework by Hohfeld [61, 60]. Note
that in this framework the term duty is used to refer to
the specific ‘obligation to act’ rather than the more general
‘obligation’. In this framework, all duties are associated
with a ‘duty-claim’ relationship between a duty holder and a
duty claimant who can claim benefits from the fulfilment of
the duty. Similarly, all powers are associated with a ‘powerliability’ relationship between a performer and a recipient
who receives the effects of the power when applied.

institutional reality

interpretation

understanding
of norms
assessment

actions,
events,
and objects

qualification

narrative/
scenario

Figure 2: Schematic overview of the processes of interpretation, qualification and assessment as taken from [15] and based on Searle [103].

structured, formal interpretation. The method suggests to
recognise actions, duties, actors and facts based on sentence
structure and to fill action-, duty-, and fact-frames with
text fragments extracted directly from the sentences. An
example frame is shown at the top of Figure 1.
When complete, the resulting interpretation is used
to assess a particular case for compliance against the formalised interpretation. However, the facts of the case also
need to be established, through a process known in the
legal domain as qualification [103]. The relation between
the aforementioned processes is given in Figure 2. Note
that interpretation and qualification are subjective, require
legal expertise and may be the subject of disputes, e.g.,
in a courtroom. However, by formalising both the interpretation result and the details of the case, unambiguous
assessment can be realised. By making FLINT executable
– eFLINT abbreviates “executable FLINT” – assessment
has been automated. An eFLINT specification has type
declarations to give meaning to frames (see Figure 1) and
includes a sub-language for defining scenarios.

2.6. Calculemus-FLINT
The design of eFLINT was motivated to assess scenarios
for compliance with norms specified in the Formal Language
for the Interpretation of Normative Texts (FLINT) of Van
Doesburg [36, 22]. The intention is for FLINT to be used
as a surface language by legal experts and eFLINT as a
back-end language by software experts.
The Calculemus-FLINT framework [37] provides a
methodology for interpreting sources of norms to produce a
4

Towards an intermediate language. A long-term goal for
the development of eFLINT has been to experiment with
the abstract syntax and semantics of an intermediate language for reasoning with arbitrary normative sources. The
high-level design decisions described in previous paragraphs
are motivated by this goal. The hypothesis has been that
the language can be used to formalise arbitrary normative
sources by adopting the most fundamental normative concepts. Moreover, the language can support different types
of normative reasoning for different types of compliance
checking by adopting a transition system semantics and
logic programming. The language is intended as a step towards an intermediate language that can support multiple
source languages, such as FLINT, and can translate into
multiple targets, such as Clingo, for various applications.
Sections 3 to 5 give a thorough description of eFLINT.
Reflections on the design, implementations, applications,
and requirements are given in Sections 5 to 7.

derivation rules accumulate through set union. The second
line thus determines that the asserted minimum prices are
also instances of price. A derivation rule can be written
as a Boolean expression using Holds when. The Boolean
expression is evaluated in a context in which the fields of a
type are bound as variables, i.e., bidder and price below.
Var highest - bid Identified by bidder * price Holds when
( Exists bid : bid . bidder == bidder && bid . price == price
&& bid . object == display . object
&& ( Forall bid ’: bid ’. price <= price
When bid ’. object == display . object ) )

This definition assumes that the fields bidder and price
and the variable bid can be enumerated to evaluate the
expression for each combination of instances of these types.
Action-types are fact-types with instances – referred to
as actions – that can be performed. The so-called postconditions determine the effects of performing actions. The
action-type below has two fields, the implicit field actor
and object. An instance of the type holds true when its
actor is recognised as an auctioneer. A performed action that does not hold true raises a violation, but still
has its effects. The effect is the creation of the instance
display(object), as well as the implicit termination of
any other elements of display owing to its status as a Var.

3. Running Example
This section introduces the eFLINT language through
an example related to auctioning. The code is introduced
incrementally with code fragments building on top of each
other in the order they are given. The reference interpreter
for the language is available online [13].
Type-declarations introduce sets and relations, each
with a domain whose instances receive a truth-assignment
in a runtime state indicating whether the instance is an
element of the corresponding set or relation. The following
type declarations introduce the initially empty sets bidder,
object, price, and display and the relations bid and
min-price-of. The set display is declared with Var,
indicating at most one instance can hold true for this type,
i.e. display acts as a variable to which an instance is
assigned (optionally). Similarly, the relation min-price-of
is ‘functional’, i.e. it maps objects to a unique price as a
mathematical, partial function.

To create (terminate) an instance is to make it true
(false). As such, performing an action results in the transition from one state to another. This also holds for events –
essentially actions without a performing actor. Whereas
actions are ‘performed’, events and actions are collectively
said to be triggered. Derivation rules are declarative in
that they do not cause state transitions. Instead, they can
be understood to ‘close’ a state by deriving new instances
from the instances created and maintained (i.e., true and
not terminated) by the previous transition.
The actor of an action can also be named explicitly:

Fact
Fact
Fact
Var
Function
Fact bid

Act place - bid Actor bidder Related to object , price
Holds when bidder
Conditioned by display ( object ) , price >
Max ( Foreach bid : bid . price When bid . object == object )
Creates bid ( int =
Count ( Foreach bid : bid When bid . object == object ) )

Var auctioneer // responsible for displaying objects
Act start - bidding Related to object
Holds when auctioneer ( actor )
Creates display ( object )
Extend Fact actor Derived from auctioneer

bidder
Identified by String // any string
object
Identified by String
price
Identified by Int
// any int
display
Identified by object
min - price - of Identified by object * price
Identified by bidder * object * price * int

This action-type declaration uses a form of constructor
application with implicit fields to create an instance of bid.
The explicit field int distinguishes bids from the same
bidder. The implicit fields bidder, object, and price are
copied directly from the fields of the triggered instance of
place-bid, i.e., bidder = bidder, price = price, etc.
The Conditioned by clause establishes preconditions for
instances to be enabled and actions to be permitted. For an
instance to be enabled, it must hold true by being created or
derived, and all its preconditions must hold. A prohibition
is the negation of a permission and performing a prohibited
action results in a violation. In this example, bids are only
permitted on displayed objects and must involve a price
higher than any previous bid.

The following statements define the function by asserting
certain instances.
+ min - price - of ( Watch , 100) .
+ min - price - of ( Clock , 200) .
+ min - price - of ( Painting , 400) .

Derivation rules can be added to type declarations to infer
truth assignments from knowledge about (other) facts. The
following type extensions demonstrate this:
Extend Fact object Derived from min - price - of . object
Extend Fact price Derived from min - price - of . price
, bid . price

The Extend keyword adds clauses to an existing declaration.
The last line above determines that every price included
in a bid is an instance of price. The results of multiple
5

A physical action, as opposed to the previous institutional actions, holds by default and is permitted unless it
synchronises with an institutional action that is prohibited.
Unlike an institutional action, a physical action can thus
be disabled and permitted. The intuition is that conditions
on physical actions constrain ability, not permission. The
physical action-type below intuitively captures the qualification of a bidder raising their hand at an auction as
placing a higher bid on the item currently on display.

on the termination of bid is realised by the application of
the infix operator When. The notion of power can thus be
constrained with the use of When within post-conditions.
The termination of the display and bid facts are considered to occur simultaneously. The Terminates expressions
are evaluated in the same context; the object is still on
display in the second Terminates clause. The same is true
for Creates and Terminates clauses and, when in conflict,
the creation of a fact is favoured over its termination.
The fragment below shows a sequence of statements
forming a script. A script includes assertions of creation (+)
and termination (-), action/event triggers (without prefix),
and queries (?). At the end of the script, Bob wins the
auction being the last to raise a hand. Bob receives the
duty to pay 140 for the watch because all bids but the first
raise the minimum price of a 100 with increments of 10,
following the definition of raise-hand. The query at the
end confirms the existence of the duty.

Physical raise - hand Syncs with place - bid (
bidder = actor , object = object , price =
min - price - of . price + increment *
Count ( Foreach bid : bid When bid . object == object ) )
When bidder ( actor ) && display ( object ) &&
( min - price - of . object == object )
Var increment Identified by Int
Extend Fact price
Derived from min - price - of . price + increment
, bid . price + increment

The consequence of synchronising an action A with an
action B is that A inherits all the pre- and postconditions
of B, effectively triggering B whenever A is triggered. The
‘synchronises with’ relation is directional: in the above,
raise-hand is not triggered if place-bid were to be triggered. The relation is transitive and potentially cyclic1 .
In the above, the type increment is used as a parameter through which it is determined how much higher the
current bid is compared to the previous. The additional
derivation rules for price are needed to enable those specific instances of place-bid that can be triggered by the
next occurrences of raise-hand.
A duty-type declaration defines a fact-type with mandatory fields for a duty-holder and a duty-claimant to establish
a duty-claim relation in the Hohfeldian legal framework.
A duty-type declaration has zero or more additional fields
(such as price below) and zero or more violation conditions. A duty raises a violation when it is enabled and
when one or more of its violation conditions hold.

+ bidder ( Alice ) . + bidder ( Bob ) . + bidder ( Chloe ) .
+ auctioneer ( David ) .
+ increment (20) .
start - bidding ( David , Watch ) . // action trigger
raise - hand ( Alice ) . raise - hand ( Bob ) . raise - hand ( Alice ) .
raise - hand ( Chloe ) . raise - hand ( Bob ) .
end - bidding ( David ) .
? payment - duty ( Bob , David , 100+4* increment ) . // True

4. Language Definition
This section introduces the syntax and semantics of
the latest version of the language as implemented by the
reference interpreter. The abstract syntax is defined formally in Figures 3 to 5. A concrete syntax definition can
be found in the source code of the reference interpreter.
The file Parse.hs contains an EBNF-like grammar description using the grammar combinators of [17]. The sections
Sections 4.1 to 4.3 describes the syntax of expressions, declarations and top-level constructs informally. In parallel,
the static and dynamic semantics of the language are described at a high-level. A formal semantics is out of scope
for this paper. A formal treatment of the semantics of a
subset of the language is found in [42]. Section 4.3 gives a
rough overview of the language’s evolution.

Bool undue - payment - delay
Duty payment - duty Holder bidder Claimant auctioneer
Related to price
Violated when undue - payment - delay ()

In the example, the duty to pay is created when the bidding
on a particular object is ended by the auctioneer. That is,
an auctioneer has the power to create payment duties.

4.1. Expressions

Act end - bidding Holds when auctioneer ( actor )
Creates payment - duty ( bidder = highest - bid . bidder
, price = highest - bid . price )
Terminates display
, bid When bid . object == display . object

Figure 3 defines the abstract syntax of eFLINT expressions. Expressions are formed by string, Boolean and
integer literals, variable occurrences and the application
of various operators. Expressions are further distinguished
into instance expressions and Boolean expressions based on
the type of value they evaluate to. Boolean expressions are
those evaluating to a Boolean value and are formed by the
comparison operators and operators such as exists, forall ,
and violated . Instance expressions are those evaluating to
a string, integer or tuple ‘tagged’ with a type identifier of
a user-defined type, i.e., an instance v is an element of the
sort instances. As the components of a tuple are tagged
values, tuples can be seen as records with the tags as field

The Terminates clauses refers to the variables display
and bid. As they are not fields of end-bidding, the variables are implicitly bound by an occurrence of Foreach.
As a result, all instances of display are terminated and
all instances of bid are terminated for which hold that the
object referred to in the bid is on display. The condition
1 Cycles are easy to detect and resolve. Semantically, the transitively closed set of synchronised actions is triggered synchronously.

6

d∈
x∈
i∈
b∈
s∈
e∈
v∈
t∈

m∈

type-ids
vars
Z
B
strings
elems
instances
exprs

=
⊇
=
::=
=
::=
::=
::=
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|
modifiers ::=

d (see modifiers). Any field x not mentioned within an
argument of the constructor application is implicitly defined
through the modifier assign(x, x). The projection operator
project(t, x) is as usual: it expects an expression t that
evaluates to a tuple tagged with a type that has the field
x. The value of that field is the result of the expression.
The foreach operator is given a variable x and an instance expression t and generates n bindings for x, one
for each2 possible instance v of the type proj (x). The
expression t is evaluated n times, each time in a modified
context binding x to one of the instances v . The result is a
sequence of m ≤ n instances. Instance expressions that are
not guaranteed to return a single instance are only acceptable in certain places such as postconditions (e.g., Create)
and as the immediate sub-expression of an accumulator
such as Count. The operator when(t1 , t2 ) is available to
filter out results in such expressions. The operator expects
an instance expression t1 and a Boolean expression t2 and
returns the value of t1 , but only when t2 evaluates to true.
As both sub-expressions are evaluated within the same context,3 when serves as a guard to ensure that instances are
returned only when certain conditions are satisfied. The
operator can only be used in places where an expression is
accepted that may return multiple instances.
The exists and forall operators are evaluated similarly
to foreach except that they operate on Booleans. The
evaluation of the sub-expression returns zero, one, or more
Boolean values. The operator returns true if and only if
one of these values is true, in the case of exists, or if all do,
in the case of forall .
The operators holds, enabled , and violated are predicates that determine whether the instance computed from
their sub-expression satisfies a certain property. An instance v is considered to hold if v is assigned ‘true’ in the
input to the program, is true in the current state, or is
derived within the current state (in that order of priority).
An instance v is considered enabled if it holds and if all the
preconditions (Conditioned by clauses) evaluate to true
in the current context. An instance v is considered violated
if it is an enabled instance of a duty-type for which one or
more of its violation conditions evaluate to true.
The reference interpreter supports various comparison
operators such as eq and geq for equality and ‘greater or
equals’. In addition to Count, accumulator operators such
as Max and Sum are available for integer expressions. The
immediate sub-expression of an accumulator must always
be an occurrence of foreach. Section 5.3 provides a detailed
discussion on the semantics of the negation operator.
The language is statically typed. The type of all variables and user-defined types are known at their declaration
and binding sites. This is in part due to the projection proj
described earlier that maps a variable name to a type. A

...
type-ids
...
tt | ff
...
s | i | tuple(v1 , . . . , vn )
(e, d)
s|i|b|x
construct t (d, t∗ )
construct m (d, m∗ )
project(t, x)
foreach(x, t) | when(t1 , t2 )
exists(x, t) | forall (x, t)
holds(t1 ) | enabled (t1 )
violated (t1 )
eq(t1 , t2 ) | geq(t1 , t2 )
count(t)
. . . (basic operators omitted)
assign(x, t)

Figure 3: The abstract syntax of eFLINT expressions.

names. Instance expressions are formed by operators such
as construct, project, and foreach. Expressions that evaluate to a string or integer literal without a tag are only
acceptable as sub-expressions.
Type checking ensures that the right kind of expressions
are used within expressions and declarations. Automatic
coercions can be applied to correct any type mismatches.
For example, the holds operator is automatically applied to
an instance expression in places where a Boolean expression
is expected. Sub-expressions evaluating to a string or
integer literal are tagged with the correct type identifier
in places where an instance expression is expected. Such
coercions can only be applied in places where the expected
type identifier can be inferred from context, e.g., within
constructor applications. Coercions may also remove the
tag, e.g., in a sub-expression where an integer is expected.
Type identifiers play multiple roles: besides giving a
name to a type, they are also used as constructor names,
field names, parameters and variables more generally. In
the concrete syntax, fields, parameters and variables are
type identifiers decorated with an index or with zero, one
or more prime symbols. For example, the variables object,
object2, object’ refer to values of type object. This is
formalised by the requirement that there is a projection
proj : vars → type-ids from variables to type identifiers.
Constructor application appears in two forms. In both
cases, a type identifier d is applied as a constructor to create
a tuple tagged with the type d. The form construct t expects
as many expressions as arguments as the type d has fields,
given in the order matching the declaration of the type. The
form construct m can receive fewer arguments, including
none at all, written in any order. In this form, arguments
explicitly associate an expression with a field of the type

2When the type proj (x) has an infinite domain, only the instances
of the type that hold true in the current state are enumerated.
3 The context of expression evaluation consists of the set of active
bindings and a set of truth-assignments to instances.

7

δ∈

domains

dc ∈
r∈
fdc ∈
ddc ∈
adc ∈
edc ∈
ext ∈
fex ∈
dex ∈
aex ∈
eex ∈

decls
restrs
fact-decls
duty-decls
act-decls
event-decls

::=
|
|
|
|
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=
::=

strings
string-set(s∗ )
Z
int-set(i∗ )
tuples(x∗ )
fdc | adc | edc | ddc
var | function
fdecl (d, δ ? , r? )
ddecl (d, x1 , x2 , x∗ )
adecl (d, b, x1 , x∗ )
edecl (d, x∗ )

extensions
fact-exts
duty-exts
act-exts
event-exts

::=
::=
::=
::=
::=

fex | dex | aex | eex
ext-fact(d, fcl ∗ , domcl ∗ )
ext-duty(d, dcl ∗ )
ext-act(d, ecl ∗ )
ext-event(d, ecl ∗ )

::=
::=
|
::=
::=
::=
|
|

int-set(i∗ ) | string-set(s∗ )
cond -by(t) | deriv -from(t)
open() | close()
fcl | viol -when(t)
fcl | c | syncs-with(t)
create(t)
terminate(t)
obfuscate(t)

domcl ∈ dom-clss
fcl ∈ fact-clss
dcl ∈ duty-clss
ecl ∈ event-clss
c ∈ post-conds

Each such fact-type defines a nullary relation. Effectively,
these are Boolean variables, as their only instance receives a
Boolean truth assignment in the runtime state. Fact-types
defined with Fact and without Identified by have the
domain strings by default.
Duty-, action-, and event-types are associated with a
domain of tuples with the fields x1 , . . . , xn given as the
last n arguments to ddecl , adecl , and edecl respectively. In
the case of a duty-type, n is ≥ 2 and x1 refers to the type
identifying the holder of the duty and x2 refers to the type
identifying the claimant of the duty. A duty-type definition
thus directly establishes duty-claim relationships. Facttypes are used to model actors in a system; the abstract
syntax does not distinguish actor-types from fact-types.
In the case of an action-type, n is ≥ 1 and x1 refers
to the type identifying the actors that can perform the
action. Any power-liability relationships introduced by
the type are derived indirectly by identifying the actors
potentially affected by the postconditions. Note that in
the concrete syntax, the actor field is optional and defaults
to actor if not explicitly mentioned. For example, in the
declaration of start-bidding the actor field is implicit,
whereas in place-bid it is explicated as bidder. An optional Recipient clause is also available but is considered
deprecated at present. The Boolean argument to adecl determines whether the declaration defines a physical or institutional action-type. A physical action holds true by default
as if the action-type has an implicit clauses Derived from
True. For an example, see the definition of raise-hand in
Section 3. An event-type is a physical action-type without an associated actor. Physical actions and events do
not raise violations but may synchronise with institutional
actions that do. A type defined by an earlier declaration
within a specification can be re-defined/overridden by a
later declaration within a specification.
A type extension adds clauses to an existing type.
Which clauses can be added to a type depends on the
kind of type. All types can have preconditions (cond -by)
and derivation rules (deriv -from). Note that Holds when
is syntactic sugar for Derived from and does not occur
in the abstract syntax. All types can have open and
closed clauses. Only duty-types can have violation conditions (e.g., payment-duty). Only action- and event-types
can have postconditions and synchronisation clauses (e.g.,
raise-hand). Only fact-types can have domain clauses.
All clauses are ‘accumulating’ in the sense that zero,
one or more clauses of the same kind can be associated
with a type. Each kind of clauses has a specific resolution
strategy to handle the absence or multiplicity of clauses
of this kind. Preconditions are conjunctive; all need to be
true for an instance of a type to be enabled. Derivation
rules are disjunctive; all instances of a type computed from
derivation rules of that type are considered to hold. A type
is considered closed unless there are only open() and no
close() clauses associated with the type. A type is thus
closed by default, can be opened once, and can subsequently
be closed forever. Violation conditions are disjunctive; only

Figure 4: Abstract syntax of eFLINT declarations.

standard, static type checking algorithm can thus be used
to type-check expressions and specifications. The language
is not strongly typed. A literal value or tuple (see elems)
can be used as an instance of more than one type. Runtime
values are therefore tagged with types (see instances).
4.2. Declarations
The core of an eFLINT specification is a collection
of type declarations and type extensions. The syntax of
declarations and extensions are defined in Figure 4. There
are four kinds of types that can be declared: facts, duties,
actions and events. Each kind of declaration gives a name
d to the type and associates a domain δ with the type.
In the case of a fact-type, this domain can be a set
of string literals, integer literals, or tuples. A domain
made out of a set of literals can be infinite (strings or Z)
or fully enumerated by the user (string-set or int-set).
The third component of a fact-type declaration determines
whether a restriction Var or Function is applied. For
fact-types with the Var restriction, only one instance can
hold true at a time, so other instances are automatically
terminated when an instance is created. For fact-types
with the Function restriction, instances are automatically
terminated to ensure the binary relation defined by the
fact-type is a partial function. If a domain δ is omitted for
a fact-type declaration, the domain is implicitly the empty
tuple, used for fact-types declared via the Bool keyword.
8

one suffices for a duty to be violated. Domain clauses
are used to either (a) add new string or integer literals to
the already finite domain of a fact-type or (b) reduce the
infinite domain of a fact-type to a finite enumeration. For
example, the following type extension enumerates possible
prices of the previously infinite type price.

q∈

::=
|
sc ∈ stmts
::=
script ∈ scripts
::=
spec ∈ specs
::=
p ∈ phrases
::=
|
|
programs =

Extend Fact price Domain 100 , 200 , 300 , 400 , 500

Semantically, type declarations and extensions define
a transition system. A state in this transition system is a
finite set of truth-assignment (true or false) to instances of
the types. Well-typed instances not mentioned in the state
are implicitly ‘unknown’. Tested but unknown assignments
default to false for closed types or to a runtime exception
for open types (further described in Section 5.2.2). As such,
the set of possible states of the transition system is determined by the domains of the types. The postconditions and
synchronisation clauses of action- and event-types determine the transitions of the transition system by modifying
the truth-assignments of the current state to obtain a next
state. A transition is labelled with the synchronised actions
and events that together manifest the effects required to
realise the transition between the two states. A trace is a
sequence of transitions from some starting state.
The effects of postconditions and synchronisation clauses
manifest themselves in parallel: when an action a is triggered, all instances computed from the expressions of the
postconditions of a are created/terminated and all actions
with which a synchronises are triggered. In this way, a triggered action can cause a chain-reaction of effects resolved
synchronously. The obfuscate(t) postcondition is a special
case of terminates(t) that removes any truth-assignments to
the instances computed from t rather than assigning them
false. This variant is needed when working with open types.
The effects of actions and events include possible violations:
a triggered institutional action is considered violating if it
was not enabled at the moment it was triggered.
The subset of the language with only type definitions,
postconditions and synchronisation clauses can be considered the imperative subset of the language, useful for
describing process models. Orthogonally, the subset of
the language with only derivation rules can be considered
the logic programming subset of the language, useful for
inferring new knowledge from existing knowledge. Finally,
the subset of the language that adds violation conditions
to duties and preconditions to institutional actions is the
normative part of the language. These clauses give normative meaning to specifications by labelling states and
transitions as violating respectively.

queries

bool -query(t)
inst-query(t)
trigger (t) | c
( sc | q )∗
( dc | ext )∗
sc | q | seq(p1 , p2 )
decl -block (spec)
phrase-block (p∗ )
(spec, domcl ∗ , i∗ , script)

Figure 5: Abstract syntax of eFLINT top-level constructs.

scenario is a sequence of statements and queries. The set
of all scenarios is called scripts in Figure 5 for consistency with [15]. Statements either trigger actions/events
or directly create/terminate/obfuscate instances. Given a
specification, a well-typed sequence of statements identifies
a trace in the transition system underlying the specification.
Queries are expressions evaluated in the context of the current state and either produce a Boolean result (bool -query)
or a collection of instances (inst-query).
Rather than a specification and a scenario, eFLINT-v1
accepted programs as defined in Figure 5 (modulo the
changes to other syntactic sorts made since). In addition,
a program admits a sequence of domain-related clauses
(dom-clss) to make finite the domains of some or all types
of the specification. Moreover, a program contains a sequence of instances to explicitly introduce an initial state,
considering all the instances mentioned in the sequence as
initially holding true. This specific separation was motivated by a one-to-many relationship between the different
components: the same specification can be refined in multiple ways, with multiple initial states defined and multiple
scenarios executed. The interpreter for eFLINT-v1 could
also be used for simulation by loading the interpreter with
a program and stepping through a scenario manually.
eFLINT-v2 and -v3. Where programs are useful to assess
the compliance of hypothetical and historical scenarios,
something more flexible was needed to assess the compliance of dynamically evolving scenarios at runtime. Programs are especially limited in situations where the specification of the scenario is evolving. Following the theory
of [19], the language was redesigned with eFLINT-v2 to
enable the incremental development of a specification and
scenario through the execution of phrases (see Figure 5).
Phrases enable declarations and statements to be mixed
arbitrarily. This version also introduced the notion of type
extensions. In eFLINT-v1, declarations had a fixed set and
amount of clauses per kind of type. Since eFLINT-v2, a
type can accumulate clauses via type extensions.
The flexibility of the phrases simplified the implementation of reasoner APIs on top of the interpreter. For
example, in [91], an architecture is presented for normative
reasoning in actor-oriented programming, enabling actors

4.3. Top-Levels and Language Evolution
Table 1 gives an overview of the changes between the
most notable versions of eFLINT. The referenced top-level
constructs are formally defined in Figure 5.
eFLINT-v1. The original and primary goal of eFLINT
has been to assess concrete scenarios for compliance. A
9

Table 1: An overview of the evolution of eFLINT. The versions v1 to v4 are referring to different versions of the reference interpreter. Version
eFLINT-clingo is an alternative implementation translating eFLINT to Clingo. Row ‘Top-level’ is referring to a syntactic sort in Figure 5.

Year
Citation
Top-level
New

Removed /
Omitted /
Deprecated

eFLINT-v1
2019
[15]
programs

eFLINT-v2
2021
[14]
phrases

eFLINT-v3
2023
–
phrases

eFLINT-v4
2026
This work
phrases

eFLINT-clingo
2025
[42]
specs × scripts

Phrases

Instance queries

Phrase blocks

Negation as failure

Type extensions

Open and Physical

Syncs with

Conditioned by

Recipient

Domain constraints

Search
Dynamic Holds When

Force action effects

that modify their interpretation of norms. The application of eFLINT reasoners triggered various language and
implementation changes in eFLINT-v3 such as instance
queries and open types whose values are determined by the
environment rather than the specification.

Simplified Enabled
Open and Physical

violations. In future work we aim to add additional top-level
syntax to eFLINT-clingo for expressing such search tasks
and model checking properties directly in eFLINT syntax.
Section 6.2 provides details on the features of eFLINT-v4
not yet present in eFLINT-clingo.
As is analysed in Section 6.3, eFLINT-clingo is the most
performant in almost all situations with respect to runtime.
The variant also received industrial uptake; eFLINT-clingo
was chosen by industry partner Abykys for the operationalisation and utilisation of eFLINT to govern data sharing
transactions. Section 6.4 provides more details and a runtime performance experiment based on an Abykys use case.
The evolution of the language was driven by additional
requirements resulting from various applications of the
language. Section 5 reflects on specific design decisions that
were made in response to these requirements. Section 7
reflects on the applications and discusses the extent to
which these requirements are met.

eFLINT-v4. Officially introduced with this paper, eFLINTv4 can be seen as a consolidation effort in which the syntax
and semantics where modified for consistency. For example, relative to eFLINT-v3, the semantics of Physical and
Open were updated according to their definition in this paper. The only breaking change introduced by eFLINT-v4 is
the modification to the semantics of Holds when to ensure
that states are finite, resulting in the current implementation that Holds when is syntactic sugar for Derived from.
This change is further discussed in Section 5.
In eFLINT-v4, the top-level syntax is a sequence of
phrases that can include blocks of phrases. Semantically,
phrases are executed in sequence, with each encountered
block having its phrases executed in parallel as one step
in the underlying trace. The execution of a block first
distils and processes all the declarations in the block, such
that new types are in scope, and then executes all the
statements and queries in parallel.

5. Design Reflections
This section reflects on the most important design decisions made in order to better meet requirements identified
across eFLINT’s evolution. The requirements are described
in Tables 2 and 3 and are referred to in the text in bold.

eFLINT-clingo. Version eFLINT-clingo was developed for
two main reasons: resolving the semantics of negation as
failure and enabling search through answer-set programming. As is discussed extensively in [42], the reference
interpreter does not properly handle negation in some
specific situations, resulting in conclusions that are inconsistent with the derivation rules. The implementation of
eFLINT-clingo is an interpreter that internally compiles a
specification and a scenario to Clingo. The Clingo solvers
is used for analysing the trace identified by the scenario,
e.g., to see which instances are enabled in certain states
and which violations occurred. The output of the Clingo
solver is translated back to the user of eFLINT.
Leveraging the abilities of Clingo, it is possible to search
for traces that satisfy criteria. For example, with a few
lines of Clingo added to the generated output, it is possible to find all action-compliant traces that result in duty-

5.1. Knowledge Representation
Types. The expressiveness of eFLINT’s knowledge representation can be demonstrated in connection to relational
algebra. Relations in eFLINT are algebraic products, akin
to database tables, predicates in Prolog [32], or triples in
RDF [75]. A multitude of derivation rules associated with
a type naturally captures the concept of union from relational algebra. Joins can be achieved by applying Exists,
Forall and Foreach operators to enumerate relations and
using When to constrain the result. The combination of
accumulator operators and When enables grouping.
In many programming languages users rely on algebraic
sums – the dual of products – to represent the concept of

10

Table 2: A description of legal and reasoning requirements.

legal
interpretation
qualification
normative concepts
abstraction level
open-texture terms
specialisation
assessment
ex-ante enforcement
ex-post enforcement
auditability
reasoning
forward chaining
backward chaining
norm priorities
infinite domains
finite domains
reducible domains
open world
closed world
micro-simulation
macro-simulation
search

The language supports ...
the formal interpretation of a wide range of norms, e.g., laws, regulations, and agreements
the formal qualification of real-world events and objects to institutional actions and facts
the most fundamental normative concepts, e.g., permission, obligation, power, etc.
formalising normative sources at their own level of abstraction
terms whose meaning is left abstract for context-specific specialisation
redefining types to provide a specialised definition with a specific context
assessing the compliance of scenarios, e.g., legal or social cases
assessing the compliance of actions (processes) before they are performed (executed)
formalising responses to violations such as penalties and compensation
recording the information required to establish how compliance decisions were made
The language supports ...
applying derivation rules and transitions in ‘forward’ direction
applying derivation rules and transitions in ‘backward’ direction
defining strategies to resolve conflicts between norms
reasoning without enumerating all potentially relevant instances a priori
reasoning with a finite set of potentially relevant instances
modifying the set of valid instances of a domain, admitting/simplifying finite reasoning
reasoning with unknown truth-values
reasoning with the closed world assumption
playing out hypothetical scenarios to see the effects of actions and their alternatives
simulating the effects of interpretations on sets of scenarios to anticipate implementation
finding scenarios that satisfy certain (un)desirable properties

heterogeneous collections, e.g., a set of mixed strings and integers (datatypes, Table 3). Like in Alloy [69], heterogeneity is expressed by using the same facts in relations of different types. For example, citizen-of(person("Amy"),
country("Germany")) and member-of(person("Amy"),
club("Chess",elo(500))) treat persons as heterogenous
collections mixing memberships and citizenships.
Act-types and duty-types behave as (relational) facttypes in how instances are represented, constructed, created
and terminated. This design choice has made it simple
to represent the legal concept of power. To change the
normative positions of (other) actors, an actor can be given
actions that create or terminate facts, actions or duties that
affect that actor (see normative concepts in Table 2).

result in surprising, difficult to diagnose specification errors.
After all, knowledge of the domain of the type is required
to predict the enumeration, which is tricky because the
domain of a type might be changed by a later extension of
the specification.
As an example, the value of count-all in the following
fragment differs depending on whether the first or second
definition of numbers is used. With the first definition
of number, all numbers 1 to 5 will be counted. With the
second definition, only numbers 1, 3, and 5 will be counted
because Int identifies the infinite domain of all integers
and because only 1, 3, and 5 are in the knowledge base.
Fact number Identified by 1..5. // finite domain
Fact number Identified by Int . // infinite domain
+ number (1) . + number (3) . + number (5) .
Var count - all Identified by Int Derived from
Count ( Foreach number : number ) .
Var count
Identified by Int Derived from
Count ( Foreach number : number When Holds ( number ) ) .

Enumerating Domains. When using eFLINT for runtime
enforcement, the norm specification is likely to require
types with infinite domains (Table 2). After all, the
instances involved in a scenario may only become apparent
as the scenario unfolds. A pragmatic design decision has
been made to give semantics to the Foreach, Forall, and
Exists operators depending on the domains of the types
they enumerate. The instances of a finite type are all enumerated, independent of whether they hold true or not. Of
an infinite type, only instances that hold in the current
knowledge base are enumerated. By design, enumeration
will therefore always terminate. In the former case, termination is guaranteed because the domain is finite and
only finitely many instances exist. In the latter case, termination is guaranteed because knowledge bases are finite
by design. The difference is subtle, impactful, and may

The definition count has the When clause to ensure only
numbers that hold are counted irrespective of whether
number was defined with an infinite domain. This construction can be used to ensure that the enumeration of a type
does not change if the domain of the type is modified.
Knowledge bases in eFLINT are finite because instances
of types are concrete rather than symbolic, i.e., instances
are fully instantiated and do not contain placeholders. The
statement +rich(person) in the following code fragment
determines that every currently known person is rich rather
than every conceivable, earlier known, or later known person. As a consequence, Chloe is not considered rich at any
moment in the execution of:
11

Table 3: A description of requirements related to services and usability.

services
case input
case output
service interface
persistence
dynamic updates
data migrations
event-based
instantiation
usability
datatypes
domain-users
source references
transparency
explainability
versioning
verification
modularity
extensible

The language supports ...
receiving information from the external environment as input
providing information to the external environment as output
specifying which information can be provided as input to a specification
persistent storage of all runtime state needed for reasoning
modifying the specification at runtime
modifying instances to recover their validity w.r.t. a modified type
responding to events, actions and observations about situations in the environment
instantiating specifications within specific contexts, e.g., via a parameter mechanism
The language supports ...
primitive, composite and user-defined types to represent facts about the world
both legal experts and software experts in their purposes for using the language
connecting code fragments to fragments from the normative source such as a regulation
communicating about interpretation and compliance decisions to affected stakeholders
explaining compliance decisions to relevant stakeholders
maintaining multiple versions of specifications and scenarios
verifying a specification through testing, debugging, and/or property checking
establishing specifications and scenarios modularly
extending existing specifications in a modular fashion, e.g., for specialisation and exceptions
that instance holds true according to a Holds when clause.
In the example, actor is then bound to David and object
to Vase. In this case, object is not enumerated as the variable is already bound and the query holds as David is an
auctioneer. The alternative semantics conflicts with the previous design choice that knowledge bases are concrete and
finite. In the alternative, start-bidding(David,object)
would hold true for all conceivable objects. The alternative
semantics has been considered and implemented, but has
been discarded with eFLINT-v4.
Compared to other logic programming languages, the
strategy followed by eFLINT for enumerating the values
of types with infinite domains is most comparable to the
default strategy for grounding rules in Datalog. In Datalog, the possible instantiations considered for variables are
determined by the set of true facts of a program. This is
also the case for the unbounded types of eFLINT. Note,
however, that the current set of known facts can dynamically change in eFLINT, e.g., following the execution of
actions and events. In contrast, eFLINT enumerates all
known facts for bounded types, not just those that hold.
Clingo applies a grounding phase to programs, grounding
each rule by replacing the rule’s variables with all possible
instantiations of the variables. The domain from which
these instances are chosen is determined syntactically, e.g.,
by including the atoms that occur in rule bodies and heads.
Datalog, Clingo and eFLINT have in common that they
reason ‘bottom-up’ by computing a fixed point from known
facts. Prolog, as a ‘top-down’ language, reasons from a
goal by applying rules in reverse and by using a unification
algorithm, thereby avoiding the need to enumerate domains.
The programmer needs to be mindful when writing rules
in order to avoid non-termination caused by, for example,
left-recursion or (other) problematic cyclic rules.

Fact person .
+ person ( Alice ) . + person ( Bob ) .
+ rich ( person ) . + person ( Chloe ) .

The statement +rich(person) is to be interpreted as the
imperative “for each known person, assert they are rich”,
rather than the declarative “every person is rich”. (This
statement has an implicit Foreach, explicated as part of
name resolution.) Note that in applications in which the
set of known persons does not change, the declarative and
imperative interpretation are consistent. The decision to
maintain concrete facts has been made on the assumption
that such knowledge bases are easier to understand for legal
experts (explainability and domain-users, see Table 3).
The declarative interpretation can be formulated using a
derivation rule to ensure every known person is considered
rich, in every knowledge base:
Fact rich Derived from person

The semantics of enumeration also affects derivation
rules. Consider the action start-bidding of the running
example. In the following code fragment, the three derivation clauses associated with the action are equivalent. The
first can be seen as syntactic sugar for the second and the
second is fully explicated by the third.
Act start - bidding Related to object // implicit actor
Holds when auctioneer ( actor )
Derived from
start - bidding ( actor , object ) When auctioneer ( actor )
Derived from ( Foreach actor , object :
start - bidding ( actor , object ) When auctioneer ( actor ) )

The query ?Holds(start-bidding(David, Vase)) does
not hold as object(Vase) is not in the knowledge base.
That object affects the first clause is counter-intuitive as
line 2 does not mention object. In an alternative semantics, we considered binding the field names of the type to
the fields of a given instance when determining whether
12

Restricting Domains. To dynamically restrict the domain
of a type, eFLINT allowed writing When <bool-expr> after
an Identified by or Related to clause. The following
(abbreviated) example taken from [15] determines that all
valid instances of collect-personal-data must satisfy
the condition subject-of(subject,data).

can be re-defined and given a field [spouses] to determine
which pair of spouses are married:
Fact [ valid marriage ] Identified by [ spouses ]

The original act-type definition is still valid with either
solution, owing to constructor application with implicit
arguments. In the second solution, the Creates expression
is equivalent to [valid marriage]([spouses]). When
an action is performed and the expression is evaluated,
[spouses] is bound to the recipient of the action. The
support for implicit arguments and quantifiers in eFLINT
thus ensures the direct translation from FLINT to eFLINT
yields executable code although extensions may be required
to obtain the desired semantics specific to the use case.
The decision which of the two solutions to apply is
influenced by the design of the software system in which
the code is applied. If the code is applied to reason about
individual, historical cases, then the first solution is effective. If the code is integrated in a system in which multiple
cases are managed, then the second solution might be preferred. An advantage of the design of eFLINT is that both
solutions can co-exist: the original definition in Figure 1
can be extended by two separate files (using the #require
directive), each implementing one of the solutions. A third
solution is to run a dedicated (process within an) eFLINT
reasoner for each individual case, instantiating (Table 3)
the preferred extension with the correct spouses.

Act collect - personal - data
Actor controller Recipient subject
Related to data , processor , purpose
When subject - of ( subject , data )
... // other clauses have been omitted

Combinations of controller, subject, data, processor,
and purpose for which the constraint does not hold are
thus not members of the type collect-personal-data
and are therefore not enumerated (e.g., by Foreach or
Forall). This feature was considered crucial in eFLINT-v1
which enabled simulating scenarios (micro-simulation,
Table 2). The interpreter can present (also in eFLINT-v4)
users with a finite list of triggerable actions and events.
For each, the interpreter shows whether the action or event
is permitted in the current state, thereby showing the
difference between ability and permission. The feature
to restrict domains served to constrain physical ability
separate from compliant behaviour. Note that the feature
essentially gave eFLINT a data-dependent type system,
complicating its semantics. For these reasons, the feature is
considered deprecated since eFLINT-v3. As an alternative,
applications can benefit from the Physical keyword and
present only enabled physical actions to users. The domains
of types can also be statically reduced by extending a type
with a Domain clause (reducible-domains, Table 2).
The desired separation between permission and power
motivated the design change in eFLINT-v3 that actions
always manifest their effects when executed, even when not
permitted. The keyword to Force the effects of actions,
was deprecated by this change. The construct ... When
Enabled(...) can be used to ensure effects manifest only
when an action is permitted.

5.2. Service Interactions
For dynamic regulatory compliance checking of software
(defined in Section 2.2), some process is required to automatically convert system events into the steps of a scenario
(the case input requirement, Table 3). Conversely, the
effects of the statements in a scenario need to be observable
and interpretable by the system, e.g, to respond to violations (case output, Table 3). Initially, a strict separation
was maintained between physical processes (external to
eFLINT) and institutional processes (internal to eFLINT),
relying on code external to eFLINT to make the connection.
However, experience demonstrated that it is convenient to
use Physical, Syncs with and derivation rules for expressing the required qualification (Table 2) within eFLINT.
Doing so, eFLINT actions and events model both physical and institutional process, and the two are explicitly
connected by eFLINT clauses.

Implicit Arguments. In a constructor application with implicit arguments, any missing arguments are implicitly the
name of the missing field (see Section 4.1). Implicit arguments simplify the translation from FLINT to eFLINT.
Consider the FLINT act-frame on the top of Figure 1
and the corresponding eFLINT code on the bottom. The
eFLINT code can be automatically generated from the
FLINT frame directly. The resulting eFLINT code is internally consistent and executable. However, there are
some issues with the code. For example, multiple (pairs
of) spouses can be represented as instances of the type
[spouses] but only one valid marriage can be represented
as [valid marriage] is a Boolean type. This problem
can be fixed in at least two ways by redefining some of the
types (specialisation, see Table 2). Firstly, [spouses]
can be defined using the Var keyword, encoding an assumption that reasoning involves at most one pair of spouses.
Secondly, [valid marriage] (and [marriage attempt])

5.2.1. Incremental and Exploratory Programming
The desire to assess dynamically evolving scenarios and
interpretations, motivated one of the most impactful design
decisions: with eFLINT-v2, the incremental programming
style of languages such as Python was adopted. In this
style, a program is a sequence of individually valid program
fragments, referred to phrases in Section 4.3 and [19]. This
is a natural fit with event-based applications and enables
case input to be given as phrases to the interpreter, and
its immediate feedback to be emitted as case output. For
example, the “raise hand” button-event can be converted
13

to an eFLINT phrase triggering the corresponding action.
When the auctioneer ends the bidding, the resulting duty to
pay can be emitted as a notification to the highest bidder.
The incremental style of programming makes specifications
extensible, modular and enables dynamic updates and
specialisation.
The change was realised by applying the design methodology presented in [19] and implemented using the generic
interpreter back-end of [46]. Benefitting from this back-end,
eFLINT supports exploratory programming, which enables
enables revisiting previous runtime states for debugging
(see verification) and micro-simulation. The execution
history contains information to retrace causes and effects,
enhancing explainability, transparency (Table 2) and
auditability (Table 3).
For security reasons and to separate concerns, it is
beneficial to restrict an eFLINT reasoner to only respond
to certain inputs and to make other types strictly internal. This way, for example, we can disallow any duties
from being created or terminated directly, but instead
only through institutional actions (powers). Similarly, we
can restrict the creation of authorizations to specific actors and thereby prevent actors from granting authorizations to themselves. For the running example we might
like to say that only the raise-hand, start-bidding and
end-bidding actions can be triggered. A possibility is to
extend the language with a module-system. At present,
we consider that an eFLINT specification implicitly describes a service interface (Table 3) by exposing only
physical actions, events, and open types (see below). An
application-specific eFLINT reasoner can impose further
restrictions on the available interactions.

Note that the information captured by open types may be
subject to change during execution. For example, it may be
reasonable to assume additional bidders are added, whereas
perhaps the minimum price of an object is fixed once set.
A mechanism has been added to eFLINT-v3 to provide
‘additional input’ alongside a phrase to instantiate certain
types for the evaluation of this phrase only. For establishing
truth, input has a higher priority than creation/termination
which has a higher priority than derivation.
The treatment of unknown affects how applications interact with eFLINT reasoners. The main design decisions
are what happens when (a) evaluation requires the determination whether an unknown instance holds true and when
(b) evaluation requires the enumeration of the instances
of an open type with an infinite domain. The execution
of a phrase is interrupted, and an exception raised, when
an unknown truth-assignment to an instance is required to
evaluate a Boolean expression. The execution of a phrase
is also interrupted when the instances of an open type need
to be enumerated and the domain of the type is infinite.
For open types with an infinite domain, the truth of all
instances not recorded in the knowledge base is unknown
and it is therefore unknown which instances require enumeration. In this case, the open type itself is reported as
part of an exception alongside the interruption.
Both types of exceptions can be understood as a request
to the execution context to provide additional input. The
first kind of exception can be resolved by the execution
context providing a truth assignment to the reported instance. The second kind of exception can be resolved by
the execution context providing the instances within the
domain of the reported type that are to be enumerated.
To resolve exceptions and continue, additional input is
provided as a set of truth assignments to instances.
Two motivations for closing a type previously declared
as open have been encountered. Firstly, certain static analyses may require finite domains and may require the closed
world assumption for all types. Secondly, a specification
with open types may be extended to specialise towards a
particular application. For example, an open-type such as
bidder may be refined to include knowledge about valid
bidders in the specification. Within a particular application
it may be valid to say that “all users except the auctioneer
are valid bidders”, expressed as follows:

5.2.2. Open Types
The Open and Closed modifiers are available to indicate whether the closed world or open world (Table 2)
assumption holds for the declared type. The logic for open
types is three-valued: true, false or unknown. An instance
is true or false if and only if it has been explicitly assigned a
truth value as part of additional input (described below), or
using Creates, Terminates, +<EXPR>, -<EXPR>, or when
it is derived as true. The truth of all other instances is
unknown. A closed type can be seen as a special case of an
open type for which unknown is also interpreted as false.
The Obfuscates clause has been added to the language to
remove the truth assignment of an instance.
The open types of a specification serve as parameters
of the specification capturing knowledge only available
within the environment in which the specification is applied (service interface). As a rule of thumb, one can
declare those (fact-)types as open whose truth values are
not modified by the specification itself. For the running
example, we could decide the following:

Open
Fact user
Identified by String
Closed Fact bidder Identified by String
Derived from user When Not ( auctioneer ( user ) )

The newly introduced type is typically an open type, such
as user in the example above. With these definitions,
bidder can be considered ‘internal’ and user ‘external’.
5.3. Reasoning by Default
The type of reasoning applied to determine the truth
assignment of instances is known as reasoning by default:
instances hold if they were created or derived by some
clause, and otherwise, by default, they do not hold. This
semantics imposes an asymmetry between truth (holding)

Open Function min - price - of Identified by object * price
Open Fact
bidder
Identified by String
Open Var
auctioneer
Identified by String

14

and falsity (not holding): only truths are witnessed, by
creations or derivations. How can we be certain that at any
given moment, all truths have been witnessed to definitively
evaluate occurrences of Not, Foreach, Count, etc.?
The literature on logic and logic programming extensively explores reasoning by default (also called negation
as failure) [29]. Its definition of falsity as the complement
of truth is simple and powerful. But, as with many logic
programming languages before, reasoning in eFLINT is
complicated by the existence of syntactically valid specifications which have no single logical interpretation. For
example, which bidders are ready, according to the definition below?

In [42], we adapted the answer set semantics (also called
the stable-model semantics) [51] for eFLINT. Intuitively, it
enumerates all possible outcomes from all acyclic interleavings of reasoning steps. Stratified specifications still have
unique answers but unstratified specifications can have no
answer - in the case of cycles - or many distinct answers in the case of ties. Either case recognises the presence of
problems in the specification, which users can then address.
In an on-going, separate research effort we are exploring
the well-founded semantics [112] as an alternative to the
answer-set semantics (e.g., see the related Seaso language
in [39]). These semantics are closely related, but they differ
in a crucial detail: like eFLINT’s original ‘greedy’ semantics,
the well-founded semantics ensures that every specification
has a unique answer, and like the answer-set semantics, the
truth assignment of the answer preserve the constraints
imposed by derivation rules. The trick is that the wellfounded semantics assigns unknown as a distinct value to
instances, and does so to those instances whose truth or
falsity would be inconsistent with the constraints. The wellfounded semantics thus marks and isolates troublesome
instances for users to diagnose. In the prior auctioneer
example, the set of bidders remains clear and determined,
but whether each bidder is an auctioneer is unspecified,
because any Boolean valuation would arbitrarily prefer one
instance over another. The well-founded semantics and
answer-set semantics align in an intuitive way: truth and
falsities in the former have the same value in all answers
of the latter [112]. That is, the well-founded semantics can
be understood to ‘summarise’ the answer-set semantics.

Fact ready Identified by bidder
Holds when Not ( ready ( bidder ) ) .

In general, the issue arises from any case where truth is
cyclically dependent on its own falsity. These dependencies
can be more subtle than in the example above. In the
example below, the contradiction of defining minimum
prices as being lower than themselves is not as obvious.
This issue can be corrected by replacing <= with <, altering
its meaning to specify that no (different) assignments of
value to the same object may be larger.
Function min - price - of Identified by object * price
Derived from bid Where
Not ( Exists min - price - of ’:
min - price - of ’. object == bid . object
&& min - price - of ’. price <= bid . price ) .

Specifications without these troublesome cyclic dependencies are called stratified because, intuitively, facts can be
categorised into ordered strata, such that the facts depend
only on facts in preceding strata, necessarily having no
cycles. Several approximations of this ideal notion of ‘stratification’ have been explored [97], because it is generally
costly to accurately recognise and exploit.
The original work on eFLINT did not consider the
subtleties of reasoning by default. For many years, the interpreter implemented a ‘greedy’ algorithm, which escaped
any cycles by overriding falsity with truth as necessary.
This solution sufficed to enable years of experimentation
and application. Many problems were naturally expressed
by stratified specifications. Consequently, the interpreter
usually behaved as expected. Otherwise, issues were usually discovered quickly, and could be worked around by just
enough refactoring until the underlying cycles vanished.
But the reasoning algorithm was found to exhibit another,
even more subtle undesirable characteristic: users could
not predict how the algorithm breaks the tie between mutually exclusive truths [42]. For example, nothing in the
following specification helps the reader to predict exactly
which bidder becomes the only auctioneer by default.

6. Implementations
This section discusses several aspects related to the
implementation efforts of the eFLINT language, focussing
primarily on the reference interpreter versions 1 through
4 in Haskell and eFLINT-clingo interpreter implemented
in Rust. The motivations behind the two implementations
are discussed and performance comparisons are made.
6.1. The Reference Interpreter
The Haskell implementation of eFLINT [13] serves as
a tool to experiment with the semantics of the language
and to prototype with alternatives. The decision was made
to implement eFLINT as a definitional interpreter, thus
simultaneously defining and implementing the language.
The main requirements for the implementation were code
readability and that adjustments should be simple to make.
The evaluation functions central to the interpreter are implemented via a principled usage of well-established Haskell
monads: the Reader monad for dealing with bindings and
scope, the State monad for state transitions, and the Writer
monad for output and exceptions. The resulting definitions
are comparable to a big-step style structural operational
semantics and, for the well-acquainted, concisely convey a
lot of information about the implemented semantics. The

Extend Fact auctioneer Derived from bidder
When Not ( Exists auctioneer ’: auctioneer ’ != bidder ) .

As with cyclic dependencies, minor refactoring usually
suffices to break all ties. However, in complex specifications,
it can be very difficult to recognise the problem and to
diagnose the tie or cycle that is to blame.
15

grammar combinators of [17, 18] are used to define the
concrete syntax of the language. The result is a syntax definition that resembles abstract syntax quite closely whilst
defining a (GLL) parser directly. These and other implementation choices promoted the requirements, generally
doing so at the cost of performance.
For these initial purposes, the interpreter was sufficiently self-documenting. However, as the user-base started
to grow, other demands were being placed on the (tool)
support for the language. Firstly, additional forms of documentation were added. Jupyter notebooks were developed
to give a gentle and high-level introduction of the main
language features, curated examples were taken from experiments and use cases, and an ever-growing set of unit
tests help testing and documenting expected behaviour of
specific language features and corner cases.
Secondly, additional front-ends and means to interact
with the interpreter were needed, resulting in REPL and
API front-ends replacing the initial simulator front-end.
The REPL front-end replaces the simulator in the most direct sense and on top of the usual REPL interactions offers
meta-commands for exploring (alternative) scenarios in a
step-by-step fashion. The API front-end has been used to
develop several wrappers for accessing the interpreter as a
reasoner, e.g., in Python, Java, and Scala for actor-oriented
programming within the AKKA framework. Especially for
users of the API front-end (and the users of the software
they build), the runtime performance of the interpreter
renders it impractical beyond basic examples. For other
users, the interpreter serves as a reference implementation
to verify their own experimental implementation of the language. For this reason, we decided to maintain the original
requirements for the Haskell interpreter and investigate
alternative, more performant implementations.
Thirdly, with more users, eFLINT was exposed to additional scrutiny and over time it was shown that the
documentation was not always complete. Specifically, the
Jupyter notebooks and curated examples are too high-level
for those seeking a detailed understanding of the language.
The test suite provides further details but was repeatedly
found to be incomplete and had to be extended as new
bugs or corner-cases were discovered. Most problematically,
in some cases the interpreter was discovered to exhibit
behaviour that was not expected or desired upon closer
inspection. These cases occurred when implementation
choices in the interpreter were not made consciously but
rather followed naturally from the way the code was organised or other features were implemented. This prompted
the effort to develop a formal semantics of the language.

(a) The eFLINT semantics is formally specified to fully
document the language’s main features in all their
details. This point is addressed by specifying a translation from eFLINT to (a subset of) Clingo, inheriting
from Clingo’s semantics in several regards.
(b) The translation addresses the Haskell interpreter’s
problems with reasoning by default, opting for the
stable model semantics of Clingo.
(c) The runtime performance of eFLINT code is significantly improved, especially in regards to the evaluation of derivation rules, benefitting from the years of
development and optimisation efforts that went into
the Clingo solver. Clingo’s superior performance has
been demonstrated at international competitions [24].
(d) The implementation supports model-checking and
searching for scenarios satisfying given criteria (supporting verification, Table 3 and search, Table 2).
The implementation consists of the translation pipeline
and calls the Clingo solver internally before converting its
output back to eFLINT. This has enabled the implementation of a reasoner on top of the eFLINT-clingo interpreter,
roughly comparable to the reasoners developed on top of
the reference interpreter. However, at present, eFLINTclingo does not support all reasoning features.
Unimplemented Features. In Section 5 it was discussed that
the reference interpreter adopted incremental programming
features, supporting its use in cases where user input is
interleaved with reasoning and output. Firstly, it raises
exceptions to request additional input when evaluating instances of Open types. Secondly, it accepts type extensions
and statements as phrases.
At present, the eFLINT-clingo interpreter supports
neither of these features. A specification and scenario
are input first, and evaluated second. Work continues
to support these features by re-introducing a layer that
maintains a mutable intermediate state. The hope is to
exploit Clingo’s more advanced features and configuration
interface [49], such that the Clingo solver maintains the
intermediate state as much as possible. In the meantime,
users can approximate these features by maintaining an
specification as mutable state themselves, and interleaving
their mutations with calls to the interpreter.
Another semantic difference is that the Enabled check
on an action a does not involve checking the preconditions
of actions that synchronise with a via Syncs with. This
dramatically simplifies the translation to Clingo and its
reasoning about each action in each state. The original
semantics is recoverable by (speculatively) performing the
action and checking if a violation results.
There is also no distinction yet between Physical and
institutional actions. We do expect to be able to leverage
this distinction for static regulatory compliance checking
using the Clingo solver (as defined Section 2.2).

6.2. The eFLINT-clingo Interpreter
From the observations of the previous subsection we
concluded that a formal definition of the semantics of
the language is needed, triggering the work on a translation from eFLINT to the Clingo language reported in [42].
Specifically, this translation and resulting implementation
addresses the following points at once:
16

6.3. Synthetic Performance Comparisons

Fact x Identified by int Derived from
( Foreach x : x ( x . int - 1) Where 0 < x . int )

In this section, we report on a suite of synthetic performance tests to compare the reference interpreter for
eFLINT-v4 and the eFLINT-clingo interpreter. Recall from
Section 5.3 that these two interpreters produce different
outputs given some inputs expressing reasoning by default.
For a fair comparison on performance, we consider only
cases where the two interpreters produce the same output.
Evidence of the equivalence of the two implementations in
these cases is given in [42]. We initially focus on concise
and synthetic inputs crafted to isolate our testing of the
performance characteristics of the interpreters to semantic
properties of the input. For example, one such property is
the length of the input scenario. In Section 6.4 we analyse
the performance of the eFLINT-clingo interpreter on a
real-world example.
With the crafted tests, we have identified trends in the
responses of both interpreters that reveal their suitability
to various kinds of input. We find that the eFLINT-clingo’s
relative strength is in handling cases of complex, yet structured reasoning in each scenario step, and it is relatively
weak in reasoning about long scenarios with trivial reasoning in each state. We ultimately find that eFLINT-clingo
generally outperforms eFLINT-v4 by a significant margin,
and the few cases of slowdown are modest.

run duration (s)

25

eFLINT-v4
eFLINT-clingo

23
21
2−1
2−3

23

24 25 26 27 28 29 210 211 212
Variable N for scenario +x( N).

Figure 6: Speed in unfolding long derivation chains.
Fact x Identified by Int Derived from
( Foreach x1 , x2 : x (( x1 + x2 ) / 2) )

run duration (s)

26

Experimental Setup. Figures 6 to 10 plot the results of an
illustrative selection of a larger set of experiments available
in full at [86]. Per plot, each measurement is the median
of 10 runs on a machine with an Intel core i9 9th generation processor with 16 hardware threads, 32GB RAM
DDR4 memory, and an NVMe hard drive. The experiments
compare both interpreters’ single-threaded performance.
Cursory experiments found that Clingo achieves no speedup
from multi-threading for inputs producing just one answer.

eFLINT-v4
eFLINT-clingo

23

20

2−3
22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 210 211 212
Variable N for scenario +x(0).+x(N).
Figure 7: Speed in reasoning with substantial integer arithmetic.

Discussion of Experiments. Figure 6 evaluates the performance of the interpreters given an input initialised with
many instances, but where only one derivation step is possible at a time. For example, in any scenario, only x(50)
is derivable just after x(51) is derived. The interpreters
exhibit similar response curves: runtime grows superlinearly with the number of derivations, presumably as a
consequence of paying the price of storing and traversing
larger knowledge bases. However, eFLINT-clingo starts
faster, and slows down more gradually. The net result is
that, compared to eFLINT-v4, eFLINT-clingo begins with
a 2× speedup and grew to 25× for the largest input that
we tested. We have no explanation for N = 211 representing a significant outlier, but we note that it was reliably
reproduced by both interpreters.
Figure 7 demonstrated a case where eFLINT-clingo
maintained approximately ×2 speedup across all test scenarios. We expect that the cost of the division operator
predominates, but more testing is required.
Figure 8 shows the results of an experiment expected
to emphasize the strengths of Clingo: the interpreter must

Fact x Identified by Int Derived from
( Foreach y : y . x1 ) , ( Foreach y : y . x2 )
( Foreach y : y . x3 ) , ( Foreach x : x ( x - 1) Where 0 < x )
Fact y Identified by x1 * x2 * x3 Derived from
( Foreach x : y (x ,x , x ) ) ,
( Foreach x1 , x2 , x3 : y ( x1 , x2 , x3 )
Where ( x1 == x2 || x2 != x3 )
&& ( Exists y : x2 < y . x1 ) )

run duration (s)

24

eFLINT-v4
eFLINT-clingo

22
20
2−2
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

Figure 8: Speed in reasoning in cases requiring the enumeration,
combination, and comparison of many instances.

17

quantify, combine, and compare many terms. This specification causes runtime cost to scale more sharply with the
independent variable, but the speedup of the new interpreter over the original are similar to that shown in Figure 6:
the simplest scenario induces 2× speedup, and the largest
scales up to 17× speedup.
Figure 9 shows a case where the reference interpreter
for eFLINT-v4 is expected to excel: minimal reasoning
is spread over a long scenario. Intuitively, the reference
interpreter was optimised around the ‘chronological’ characteristic of eFLINT scenarios and states: reasoning about
each state N depends only on states N − 1 and N . The
reference interpreter reasons sequentially, wasting no time
considering unrelated states. By comparison, Clingo threatens to reason naïvely, because the entire eFLINT specification and scenario are encoded as a monolithic Clingo
ruleset, and we cannot assume that Clingo recognises and
exploits its subtle chronological property. Indeed, we find
that eFLINT-clingo’s speedup peaks with 94% at N = 26 ,
waning to 82% speedup at N = 210 . However, clearly,
eFLINT-clingo overall still outperforms eFLINT-v4 by a
significant margin, and this experiment suggests that its
performance advantage will only be lost in scenarios far
longer than we expect to encounter in practice. Nevertheless, we consider this to be an interesting direction of
future research, to which we hope to leverage Clingo’s
multi-shot solving [49], where Clingo’s processing of input
is interleaved with reasoning and output.
Finally, Figure 10 shows a case where eFLINT-v4 outperformed eFLINT-clingo. This input is a carefully crafted
encoding of the prime sieving problem: enumerate all prime
numbers to a given maximum [11]. Here, we expect Clingo’s
heuristics for selecting rules to fail. Both interpreters use a
similar solution: naïvely enumerate triples (X, Y ) and test
if X × Y = Z for each Z. Performance then depends on
the order that the integer pairs are enumerated. Evidently,
eFLINT-v4 gets lucky more often. But this outcome was
sensitive to the encoding of the problem. For example,
chaining addleq via Derived from instead of Syncs with
slowed down eFLINT-v4. More experimentation is required
to precisely explain the sensitivity to such particulars of
the specification. We conclude that eFLINT-clingo benefits
from specifications with more structured reasoning, where
Clingo’s heuristics try applicable rules more often.

Fact x Identified by Int Derived from
( Foreach y : y . x1 ) , ( Foreach y : y . x2 )
( Foreach y : y . x3 ) , ( Foreach x : x ( x - 1) Where 0 < x )
Fact y Identified by x1 * x2 * x3 Derived from
( Foreach x : y (x ,x , x ) ) ,
( Foreach x1 , x2 , x3 : y ( x1 , x2 , x3 )
Where ( x1 == x2 || x2 != x3 )
&& ( Exists y : x2 < y . x1 ) )

eFLINT-v4
eFLINT-clingo

26

run duration (s)

25
24
23
22
21
20
2−1
2−2

20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 210
Variable N for scenario of +x(4). repeated N times
Figure 9: Speed in reasoning about the same, moderate reasoning
work at each step of scenarios with varying lengths.

Fact prime Identified by Int
Derived from ( Foreach int : prime ( int )
Where Not ( Exists int1 , int2 :
1 Where int1 * int2 == int ) )
Event addleq Related to int Creates int
Syncs with addleq ( int - 1) Where 2 < int

eFLINT-v4
eFLINT-clingo

35

run duration (s)

30

6.4. Realistic Performance Tests

25
20
15
10

This section is intended to demonstrate that eFLINT is
sufficiently expressive – and eFLINT-clingo is sufficiently
performant – to solve real-world problems. The demonstration is borrowed from a deployment of eFLINT-clingo
in practice. We briefly describe this usage of eFLINT and
report that all inputs were evaluated sufficiently quickly.
The Products and Data Exchange (PDX) is a product
released in October 2025 as part of the Dutch Metropolitan
Innovations (DMI) ecosystem for data-driven innovations
managed by the Dutch Ministry of Infrastructure. The

5
0
0

50
100
150
200
250
300
Variable N for scenario add_leq(N).

Figure 10: Speed in enumerating all prime numbers up to a maximum.

18

load parse check trans. reason
total
v4
s0 35.97 34.43 13.32 7.55 318.46 409.73 15,087
s1 37.82 33.78 13.01 7.46 373.40 465.48 15,472
s2 40.28 36.47 13.65 7.58 1,055.78 1,153.75 15,415
s3 45.87 42.07 15.07 7.62 3,603.24 3,713.88 19,479

PDX serves DMI members as a platform for offering, cataloguing, exchanging, and processing datasets and services.
A novelty of the PDX is its deep integration and automatic enforcement of regulatory documents, in particular
the GDPR privacy regulation and the governance rules of
the ecosystem. The governance component of the PDX,
developed and maintained by Abykys4 , is built on top
of eFLINT-clingo and enforces the compliance of datatransactions with the regulations formalised in eFLINT.
The ‘DMI Afsprakenstelsel’ defines the rules governing
data-transactions and demands compliance with the GDPR.
A precise definition of what is automatically enforced is
given at the DMI website5 . The enforcement of the GDPR
focusses on purpose limitation, ensuring that data controller
and processor agree on a lawful processing purpose.

Table 4: Runtime in milliseconds of stages of eFLINT-clingo compared to the eFLINT-v4 total with the Afsprakenstelsel as the input
specification alongside one of four input scenarios {s0 , s1 , s2 , s3 }.

Table 5: An list of software using eFLINT. Source code is available
by clicking on the software title in a PDF version of this paper.

Title (PoC = Proof-of-Concept)
FLINT Rule Editor
Medical Data PoC
Normative Advisors PoC
Ex-post Enforcement PoC
eFLINT-check PoC
Case Management PoC
Normative Sources PoC
AMdEX Fieldlab PoC
Brane Orchestrator
JustAct PoC
eFLINT reasoner in DMI

Experimental setup. The specification of the governance
rules is continuously extended, refactored, and refined. We
focus on the version that was active on 23 April 2026. The
specification consists of 1,543 lines of code, excluding comments and blank lines. With Abykys’ permission, we have
included a sample6 of their test scenarios, sampling the
spectrum from simple to complex scenarios that Abykys
encounters. We call these scenarios s0 (the simplest, consisting of zero statements) to s3 (the most complex, consisting
of 49 statements). Table 4 reports on the time required for
(stages of) the eFLINT-clingo interpreter to evaluate each
scenario.7 These tests were executed on a machine with an
AMD Ryzen AI 7 PRO 350 processor with 8 physical kernels and 16 software threads, 32GB RAM DDR4 memory
and an NVMe disc. The test inputs are available in their
entirety at [102]. The precise integration of eFLINT-clingo
into the PDX software is not publicly available; we can only
report the assurance of the Abykys developers that their
version of eFLINT-clingo remains very close to the version
openly available at [86]. The same tests were executed with
the reference interpreter for a ball-park comparison of total
running times.
The experiments in this and the previous subsection
served to compare two implementations of eFLINT. Both
implementations deal with the complication that the language is both logical and imperative in nature. Specific
applications of the language may only use a subset of the
language and may thereby permit more efficient execution
strategies. Depending on the features required for an application, choosing an alternative DSL or general-purpose
language could therefore lead to better performance than
can be realised with the two implementations discussed in

eFLINTv1
v2
v2
v2
v2
v3
v3
v3
v3
v3
clingo

Refs
[14]
[91]
[81]
[34]
[107]
[72]
[16]
[6, 7, 43]
[41]
-

this section. In future work, we aim to work on eFLINT
variants that admit more efficient execution strategies, e.g.,
by giving a fully procedural interpretation to eFLINT.
These variants will be more restrictive by giving syntax
errors, type errors, or warnings to specifications to which
an alternative execution strategy is not applicable.
7. Discussion and Future Work
This section reflects on the satisfaction of the requirements of Tables 2 and 3. References to the requirements
are given in bold. The reflection is a continuation of
the discussion around requirements in Sections 5 and 6
and is based on experience with software systems applying
eFLINT. An overview of the software is given in Table 5.
After discussing these experiences, Section 7.4 discusses
limitations and describes possible avenues of future work.
The development of eFLINT went through phases, starting with the analyses of historical cases and simulation,
followed by dynamically evolving cases, model checking and
system integration. Applications involving eFLINT have
been developed by students, researchers and practitioners
at various technological readiness levels (TRLs), with most
applications validating concepts ‘in the lab’ (≤TRL3, following the definition of TRL by the European Committee)
or performing demonstrations with stakeholders in realistic test environments (≤TRL6). Especially notable is
the (∼TRL8) application of eFLINT as part of the DMI
ecosystem mentioned in Section 6.4. No applications of
eFLINT rely on specific features of a version that make it
impossible to migrate to the latest version of the language.

4 https://abykys.com
5 Here: https://definities.dmi-ecosysteem.nl (In Dutch).
6 Our versions of these test scenarios precisely match the versions

made and tested internally by Abykys, except that two strings identifying DMI stakeholders were replaced to protect their privacy.
7 As can be seen, these cases all spend the majority of time in the
‘reasoning’ stage. But this belies the time Clingo spends actually
applying rules, because this work is interleaved with formatting and
writing thousands of lines of answer text as output.

19

favours performance as less information needs to be processed for every request. The latter favours resilience as
reasoner instances can crash without losing runtime state,
thus demonstrating persistence. Stateful execution and
persistence through an external database are both at odds
with adapting to changes in norms, however. After all,
changes in norms might require data migrations when
affecting the fields in type-declarations. At present we have
not demonstrated how this can be achieved with eFLINT.
Another potential application of eFLINT to governance
is to conduct macro-simulations by establishing representative ‘populations’ of hypothetical citizens and analyse
sets of cases, such as tax returns, for these populations.
This makes it possible to determine the effects of (e.g., tax)
policies on subsets of the wider population while the policy
is drafted. Although eFLINT should be able to support
this application, we have not yet given a demonstration.

7.1. Automating Governance
The eFLINT language has been used in experiments to
investigate automating case assessment by governmental
organisations based on laws, e.g., for deciding on permits
or tax reduction requests. An initial experiment with
ICTU – an IT organisation within the Dutch government –
developed the first version of an editor for developing norm
specifications and scenarios with FLINT and eFLINT. The
FLINT Rule Editor was used by ICTU domain experts,
successfully confirming the usefulness of the languages for
developing formalised interpretations of laws which can
subsequently be used for automatic case assessment and
micro-simulation. The separation between FLINT and
eFLINT in the editor does make it difficult for legal and
software experts (domain-users) to work together. We
expect this limitation can be partially mitigated with better
tool support delivering a tighter integration.
Motivated by ‘Rules as Code’ [84], the initial experiment
demonstrated how developing machine-readable interpretations of law can promote government transparency and
can aid resolving disputes caused by differences in interpretation. For these reasons, FLINT establishes source
references between its frames and the original normative
sources in a format following the JuriConnect standard [21].
A later project developed a data structure for storing a
multitude of interpretations, efficiently interlinking fragments of eFLINT and normative sources [72], demonstrating eFLINT’s modularity, extensibility and versioning.
In a subsequent experiment, a proof-of-concept (PoC)
case management system was developed to assist civil servants in making decisions on cases [107]. The PoC was
developed to demonstrate the ability to adapt to changes
in laws or policy (dynamic updates) and to enforce the
powers and duties of both civil servant and citizen. In the
PoC, an eFLINT reasoner is instantiated to keep track
of the progress of gathering information and making decisions on a case. At any time, the system can inform the
users of their permitted actions and duties, e.g., to deliver
information (citizen) or to make a decision (civil servant).
The user interface of the system is populated with buttons
and form elements based on information received by the
reasoner about the physical actions and open types of the
specification as well as the contents of the knowledge base.
This mechanism makes the system adaptable in the sense
that the UI responds to changes in the underlying eFLINT
specification. The PoC thus benefitted from eFLINT’s
ability to implicitly specify a service interface and to
handle case input and produce case output upon request. The underlying specification naturally considered an
open world and specified infinite domains in order to
admit, for example, new citizens registering and submitting
unpremeditated numerical information.
Two models were experimented with for keeping track
of the progress of cases as they develop over time. The
required runtime information is recorded statefully by the
interpreter or within a separate database. The former

7.2. Distributed Systems
In other applications, we have experimented with the
automatic enforcement of (privacy) regulations, consortium
agreements and data sharing conditions within distributed
data exchange systems. In a data exchange system, data
producers, consumers and service providers collaborate to
execute data processing workflows. We presented a reference architecture for data exchange systems with automatic
enforcement of regulations and agreements in [16]. In the
AMdEX Fieldlab PoC, implementing the architecture, compliance is checked and enforced dynamically by a reasoner
listening and responding to messages, benefitting from the
event-based nature of eFLINT. An eFLINT reasoner has
also been used by the Brane Orchestrator for planning and
distributing compliant data processing tasks [43, 6, 7]. The
orchestrator can potentially benefit from eFLINT-clingo’s
capabilities to search for compliant plans rather than
relying on the current trial and error approach.
As inter-domain applications, data exchange systems
require mechanisms for cross-domain authentication [53]
and consensus. Consensus is needed on (a) the applied
norms, e.g. to establish which interpretation of the GDPR
is applied, on (b) policy input, e.g., whether a particular
user is affiliated with a member of a consortium, on (c)
the transpired events, e.g., whether data was accessed, and
(d) on the decisions made by the normative reasoner, e.g.,
whether authorisation was given. The JustAct PoC was
developed to demonstrate a method to communicate about
policies, achieve consensus, and for accountable decision
making [40, 41].
In inter-domain applications, auditability is of high
importance [94, 104]. To achieve a form of accountability,
we can translate eFLINT to a smart contract language in a
way that the interpretation is recorded as a smart contract
and the assessed scenario is recorded on the ledger. We have
conducted experiments to confirm the possibility, although
a complete, automated translation is not yet available.
Evidence of the possibility is provided by [95], presenting
a translation from Symboleo [105] to Solidity [44, 115].
20

We developed multi-agent systems to experiment with
different architectures and setups for automating compliance in distributed systems. In these experiments, so-called
‘normative advisors’ are agents that reason with norms
based on observations communicated by other agents or
by the environment [91]. Our approach made it possible
to experiment with different models for distributing institutional facts and institutional reasoning and required
multiple eFLINT reasoners to co-exist (instantiation).
One can define a system with a single agent monitoring
and assessing the behaviour of all agents in the system.
Alternatively, every agent can have its own normative advisor and use normative reasoning for planning. Such
planning activities by agents benefitted from simulation
of hypothetical scenarios through the forward chaining
applied by the reference interpreter. The search capability
of eFLINT-clingo can be used for backward chaining,
reasoning backwards from a goal state to the current state.
These experiments also included agents for dynamic,
ex-post enforcement that decide whether and how to
respond to observed violations [81]. These agents may be
fully autonomous, or may require a ‘human in the loop’.
In [14], an experiment is reported that demonstrate how
eFLINT can be used to gradually specialise a generic law
to a concrete, actionable set of policy rules. In this Medical
Data PoC, elements of the GDPR were concretised by the
data processing agreement of a medical consortium. The
resulting specification was operationalised by dynamically
generating access control policies for governing the access
to data, demonstrating ex-ante enforcement. The experiment also demonstrated the ability to formalise normative
sources as their own abstraction level, ensuring that the
formalisation of the GDPR fragments can be reused across
applications without modification. The formalisation of
the agreement demonstrated the specialisation of the
GDPR provisions to this specific medical context. The
same mechanism was used to concretise open-texture
terms, such as ‘undue delay’ in the GDPR, which are deliberately under-specified at that level of abstraction [54].

tioned applications, i.e., to verify certain properties before
deploying a specification in a case management or data
exchange system, without having to maintain multiple versions of the specification (static, ex-ante enforcement).
To achieve this, we can rely on eFLINT’s features to extend
a specification by closing open types and reducing domains to finite domains. This way, the same specification
can be extended for model-checking and for deployment.
In future work we wish to demonstrate that we can use
model checking for static regulatory compliance checking
as described in Section 2.2 by taking advantage of the
separation between physical and institutional actions in
eFLINT. In addition, we aim to investigate the applicability
of combinatorial, property-based testing for eFLINT [52].
7.4. Limitations and Future Work
The various experiments discussed in the previous subsections demonstrate the expressive capability of the language, including the suitability of the datatypes offered
for knowledge representation. For specific applications,
additional primitive types and operators may be needed,
such as real or floating point numbers and operators for
string manipulation. Future versions of the language may
add additional types and operators, although potentially
at the cost that not all implementations offer support. The
semantics of eFLINT can be made more expressive by considering continuous elements, e.g., to represent clocks, and
probabilistic reasoning.
Pragmatic design decisions have been made to ensure
the language is sufficiently flexible to be used for various
kinds of applications. However, a flexible solution is not
always the most user-friendly solution. For example, in
some applications a strict separation between specification
(type declarations) and scenarios (statements) is useful, and
the closed world assumption and finite domains are needed
for model checking. In these applications, the necessary
constraints need to be assumed. Conversely, a variant of the
language dedicated to an application could enforce the constraints syntactically or using static analyses. For security
reasons, it would also be better to explicitly hide/expose
types using a module system (service interface).
At present, the language is not sufficiently friendly for
use by legal experts without software expertise. Experience
with computer science students does suggest that the language is relatively easy to learn for those with programming
experience, especially declarative programming experience.
Both language implementations are also lacking a mechanism to report how facts came to be true (or false). Ideally,
such a report contains the sequence of rules and statements
that were applied to render the fact true (or false). This
feature is difficult to implement due to reasoning by default
(e.g., in case of negation) and the subtle interplay between
derivation rules and state transitions. The information
from such a report is essential to achieve explainability.
In Section 5 we discussed the use of an execution graph
in the reference interpreter to maintain execution history

7.3. Bounded Model-Checking
The applications described in the previous subsection
are about concrete scenarios – whether actual, historical,
or hypothetical – and may involve the enumeration of large
sets of scenarios, e.g., when testing or running simulations. In other work we applied bounded model-checking
to demonstrate the verification of safety and liveness
properties [34] via a translation to nuXmv [25]. In these
experiments we reason about abstract scenarios, using, for
example, linear temporal logic to describe scenarios mixing concrete details and abstract placeholders. To apply
bounded model-checking, eFLINT specifications must have
finite domains such that in every runtime state, only a
finite amount of transitions are possible. Bounded modelchecking also requires the closed world assumption.
A goal of this experiment was to show that modelchecking can be used in combination with the aforemen21

as an essential, yet less fine-grained, contributor to explainability. Note that in general, however, explainability
requires the tailoring of information to specific receivers,
tying the requirement together with the domain-users
requirement. That is, legal and software experts appreciate
a different perspective on the low-level system information.
An open question still being investigated is how the
interpretation process can best be supported, especially
to deal with the amount of existing laws and regulations
and the pace with which they are produced. The current
FLINT Rule Editor deploys a pipeline in which natural
language processing (NLP) produces FLINT frames from
a normative source. A legal expert then completes, refines
and verifies the generated FLINT frames. A software expert completes and refines the eFLINT code automatically
generated from the FLINT frames by using eFLINT’s extension mechanism. In a new project we will experiment
with the use of generative AI within this pipeline.
Software expertise is needed, in particular, to refine
the eFLINT code in order to formalise the connection
between the eFLINT specification and the software environment in which the specification will integrate, e.g.,
using qualification rules, instrumentation, scripting and/or
API adaptation. Software expertise is also needed to add
computational details not easily derived from the natural
language sources, such as quantification and constraints
on the possible substitutions of variables. For consistency,
however, it may be preferred for both experts to work on
shared artefacts written in the same language.
As possible future work, we envisage a norm specification language which comprises an intermediate language
and one or more legal surface-level languages. The experiences gained during the development of eFLINT, reported in this paper, make it possible to identify a minimal
computational core that is complete with respect to the
requirements. One motivation behind such a (re-)design is
improving usability for legal and domain experts by offering
a more tailored experience and potentially allowing both
experts to work on the same specification. For example,
a keyword such as Syncs with should be hidden as we
should not require legal experts to think about transition
system semantics. A rule-based syntax can be used to
express the relation between raise-hand and place-bid
without Syncs with as follows:

To support a wide range of user-facing languages, additional normative concepts need to be mapped to computational concepts. For example, eFLINT equates a prohibition to act with the negation of a permission to act.
Rather than forcing this interpretation, an intermediate
language could simultaneously support explicit permissions
and prohibitions. Permissions and prohibitions can then
conflict, and a priority mechanism is needed to resolve such
conflicts. For example, permissions and prohibitions may
be assigned by actors with different levels of authority or
may originate from different sources of norms that differ
in precedence or specificity. FLINT and eFLINT currently
lack an explicit mechanism for conflict resolution (norm
priorities). The eFLINT semantics give an implicit priority to prohibitions over permissions, and to powers over
prohibitions, due to how violations are generated and the
effects of actions manifest.
A formal operational semantics and a type system would
enable a more precise and detailed discussion on the language’s design, its properties and possible variants. At
present, neither exists for eFLINT-v4. In [42], a formal
semantics has been given to eFLINT-clingo.
8. Related work
In this section we describe work related to automating
compliance and compare eFLINT to existing languages.
Several software languages and logics exist to formalise and
reason with norms from various sources and within different
application areas. The language and logics differ primarily
in their support for fundamental normative concepts, the
types of legal documents targeted by the language, the
means of execution, and the intended applicatons.
Normative concepts. Relative to other languages, eFLINT
is most similar to languages based on the event calculus [76, 99, 98, 28] such as Symboleo [105] and InstAL [90].
Like eFLINT(-clingo), the Institutional Action Language
(InstAL) is a DSL for specifying norms in terms of duties
and powers translating to Answer Set Programming (ASP)
for execution. The language has been primarily proposed
for modelling institutions and reasoning within multi-agent
systems, whereas eFLINT, in addition, has been developed to integrate in software systems and to reason about
regulatory compliance of software.
Symboleo and eFLINT are both based on Hohfeld’s
legal framework [60] that emphasises normative relations
between actors centred around the normative concepts of
power and duty. eFLINT is designed to specify norms
from a wide range of legal documents, whereas Symboleo
is designed specifically for contracts, embedding notions
of contract state in the language. Instead of relying on
built-in state predicates, an eFLINT user could define such
predicates themselves. The original implementation of
Symboleo was also based on logic programming (in Prolog,
see [105]) and the language has since also been implemented

raise-hand(bidder) QualifiesAs
place-bid(bidder, display.object, price)
Where price = ...
... is equivalent to ...
Extend raise - hand Syncs with place - bid
( bidder = actor , object = display . object , price = ...)

We can go further by enabling such rules to be expressed in
a controlled natural language such as a variant of Logical
English, developed by Kowalski for, among other things,
coding legal rules as logic programs [77]. Another example
is RegelSpraak, developed by the Dutch tax administration
to formalise parts of the Dutch tax law [33].
22

to admit model checking [93], access control [4] and to
generate smart contracts [95].
Other formal languages for expressing norms are directly based on modal logics such as deontic logic [59] and
defeasible logic [87, 55]. Deontic logics have been studied extensively for normative reasoning [64, 47]. Deontic
logics admit modalities (operators) for expressing the permission, prohibition and obligation of propositions built
from predicates. An appealing aspect of deontic logics is
that applications of the operators can be nested, making
it possible to capture and compare subtle differences in
interpretations. Moreover, conflicts between permissions
and prohibitions can be explicitly expressed. A downside
is the absence of actions, events and temporal reasoning.
For temporal reasoning, an eFLINT specification defines a process model through its action- and event-type
declarations. As such, it is possible to represent changes in
facts and norms, and therefore to formalise the normative
concept of power. A benefit of eFLINT’s event-based approach is that checking the compliance of software systems
is simplified because systems are inherently event-based.
The lack of temporal reasoning in deontic logics is
addressed by Deontic Action Logics (DALs) shifting the
perspective from deontic operators on predicates to deontic
operators on actions [8]. Actions can be composed via
parallel or free-choice composition operators. Permission
and prohibition operators are used to determine under
which conditions actions are permitted or prohibited.
LegalRuleML extends RuleML as a markup language
for representing and exchanging legal rules based on deontic and defeasible logic. An interpretation of LegalRuleML
rules in terms of a defeasible logic has been given in [79]. As
part of future work, it would be meaningful to demonstrate
to which extent eFLINT can be used as a back-end for executing LegalRuleML rules. In [106], parts of LegalRuleML
have been translated to a custom intermediate language to
enable reasoning with multiple automated theorem provers
with different levels of expressivity.
Temporal logics such as Linear Temporal Logic (LTL)
and Computation-Tree Logic (CTL) have been combined
with concepts for normative reasoning. For example, Normative Temporal Logic (NTL) is a temporal logic that
replaces the path quantifiers of Computation-Tree Logic
(CTL) to express obligations and permissions [116]. Temporal Defeasible Logic (TDL) combines defeasibility and
temporal logic [56]. The FIEVeL specification language is
used to model institutional policies [113] based on Ordered
Many-Sorted First-Order Temporal Logic (OMSFOTL) and
uses SPIN [62] for model checking. In [10], the connection
between coordination problems and norm enforcement is
formalised using LTL. The language Revani [71] uses CTL
for the specification of privacy norms in the context of
sociotechnical systems.

is the subset of the law with statutes describing (potentially
complex) computations. Both languages are explicitly designed to admit co-development of specifications by lawyers
and programmers. The languages are used as part of legal
expert systems [66], sharing our motivation of enabling
automated governance (see Section 7.1).
Focussed on computational law, both languages do not
directly embed normative concepts such as permission,
obligation or power. A specification essentially describes
a collection of functions defined through rules capturing
the intricacies of the computations embedded in laws. The
emphasis is on explicating implicit elements and identifying
and resolving ambiguities in the law. In Catala, specific
attention is given to the modular and literate development of a specification, allowing earlier definitions to be
supplemented by later definitions through an exception
mechanism, comparable to eFLINT’s type extensions. The
lessons learnt – such as on co-development and working
with dates [85] – can inspire next versions of eFLINT.
Contracts. Contracts form a subset of the law that is characterised by a number of properties that are particularly
amenable to automation. A contract encodes an agreement
between two or more parties with an explicitly defined scope
and lays out how the normative positions of the involved
parties evolve over time, typically in response to events.
As such, a contract can naturally be formalised by a state
machine. This observation forms the basis underneath
smart contracts.
First introduced by Szabo [108] for the exchange of digital assets, smart contracts are now most popular for their
usage as scripts executing transactions recorded on a distributed ledger (the blockchain). Owing to their execution
model, smart contracts can guarantee that the exchange of
certain digital assets proceeds according to rules encoded
in the smart contracts. Several blockchain platforms exist,
often with their own language for developing smart contracts. But despite their name, smart contract languages
are not designed for automating legal compliance and do
not support normative concepts directly [5, 82]. Smart
contract languages can form an interesting compilation target for normative specification languages, however. After
all, using the ledger, blockchain applications can provide
auditability and transparency [94, 104, 109]. As mentioned
earlier, Symboleo contracts translate to smart contracts [95].
In [9], Azzopardi et al. describe an approach for monitoring
deontic concepts using smart contracts.
Access and Usage Control. A significant body of work
exists concerning the formalisation, analysis and enforcement of specific kinds of policies [68] such as access control
policies [88, 67] and network policies [3]. The Margrave Policy Analyzer tool8 supports multiple formalisms to reason
about such policies. For example, change-impact analysis

Computational law. The languages Catala [83] and RegelSpraak [33] are explicitly targetted for computational law,
such as tax laws or social benefits laws. Computational law

8 http://www.margrave-tool.org/

23

makes the impact of changes to policies insightful [45] and
would be useful to normative specification languages.
Many access control models exist [101, 89]. The most
common are Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC) [65],
Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) [100], and PurposeBased Access Control (PBAC) [23]. The knowledge representation of eFLINT is sufficiently expressive to capture
policies based on roles, attributes and purposes.
XACML is a popular ABAC language and the XACML
architecture [88] is widespread as a model for systems
integrating ABAC or other forms of access control. The
primary feature of the XACML architecture is its separation
of concerns, making it possible for a system administrator
to modify policies without other changes to the system.
An eFLINT reasoner can be used as a policy decision
point within the XACML architecture, as demonstrated
in [16, 14].
Whereas access control can enforce permissions and
prohibitions, usage control models take a step towards the
enforcement of obligations. That is, policies can specify
invariants that need to be maintained for the duration
of a data processing action [92]. However, many usage
conditions in data processing agreements, such as retention periods, cannot be enforced this way, as they survive
beyond the processing activity. ODRL is popular as a standard for defining usage control policies controlling specific
actions on multi-media assets [67, 96, 114]. As a representation language, ODRL does not have a fixed semantics9 .
Although ODRL embeds the concept ‘obligation’, it is
rather a permission from the normative perspective [73].

usability of the language, in particular for legal experts, by
developing new ways of interacting with the language, including alternative surface-level languages, static analyses,
back-ends, and editors.
Acknowledgments
Special thanks go to all the students, researchers, and
domain experts that have provided feedback over the years.
Additional thanks to the anonymous reviewers for their
useful suggestions to improving this paper.
This work has been executed as part of the SSPDDP
project supported by NWO (628.009.014), the AMdEX
Fieldlab project supported by Kansen Voor West EFRO
(KVW00309) and the province of Noord-Holland, and the
DMI ecosystem supported by the National Growth Fund.
References
[1] Aagesen, G., Krogstie, J.: BPMN 2.0 for Modeling Business Processes, pp. 219–250. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-45100-3_10
[2] van der Aalst, W.M.P.: Conformance Checking, pp.
191–213. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2011). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-64219345-3_7
[3] Al-Shaer, E.S., Hamed, H.H.: Modeling and management of firewall policies. IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management 1(1), 2–10 (2004).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TNSM.2004.4623689

9. Conclusion

[4] Alfuhaid, S., Anda, A.A., Amyot, D., Roveri, M., Mylopoulos, J.: Symboleoac: An access control model
for legal contracts. In: Paja, E., Zdravkovic, J.,
Kavakli, E., Stirna, J. (eds.) The Practice of Enterprise Modeling. pp. 227–243. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3031-77908-4_14

This paper has reflected on the design and implementations of eFLINT based on requirements extracted from
experiments in various application areas. The main novelty
of the language is the orientation of the language towards
the formalisation of a wide range of normative sources,
including many classes of legal documents such as regulations, laws and contracts. A specification in the language
defines data-types for knowledge representation, process
modelling and establishes norms by applying the language’s
formalisation of the normative concepts of permission, prohibition, obligation and power. Through specific language
constructs, normative sources can be formalised at their
own level of abstraction, reused, interconnected and integrated into software systems. The language’s flexibility
allows it to be used across application areas such as static
and dynamic regulatory compliance checking, auditing,
and simulation. The flexibility is achieved through certain pragmatic design decisions and by embedding software
engineering principles such as modularity and extensibility. The main future developments are to increase the

[5] Allen, J.: Wrapped and stacked: ‘smart contracts’
and the interaction of natural and formal language.
European Review of Contract Law 14(4), 307–343
(2018). https://doi.org/doi:10.1515/ercl-2018-1023
[6] Alsayed Kassem, J., Allaart, C., Amiri, S., Kebede,
M., Müller, T., Turner, R., Belloum, A., van Binsbergen, L.T., Grunwald, P., van Halteren, A., Grosso,
P., de Laat, C., Klous, S.: Building a Digital
Health Twin for Personalized Intervention: The EPI
Project. In: Haverkort, B.R., de Jongste, A., van
Kuilenburg, P., Vromans, R.D. (eds.) Commit2Data.
Open Access Series in Informatics (OASIcs),
vol. 124, pp. 2:1–2:18. Schloss Dagstuhl – LeibnizZentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany (2024).
https://doi.org/10.4230/OASIcs.Commit2Data.2

9 A working group is specifying semantics for ODRL here: https:
//w3c.github.io/odrl/formal-semantics/.

24

[7] Alsayed Kassem, J., Müller, T., Esterhuyse,
on Generative Programming: Concepts and ExpeC.A., Kebede, M.G., Osseyran, A., Grosso, P.:
riences. pp. 124––136. GPCE 2020, ACM (2020).
The EPI framework: A data privacy by design
https://doi.org/10.1145/3425898.3426958
framework to support healthcare use cases. Future
[16] van Binsbergen, L.T., Oost-Rosengren, M., SchreiGeneration Computer Systems 165, 107550 (2025).
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2024.107550, jer, H., Dijkstra, F., van Dijk, T.: AMdEX Reference Architecture – version 1.0.0. Zenodo (2 2024).
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10565915
article/pii/S0167739X24005144
[17] van Binsbergen, L.T., Scott, E., Johnstone, A.: GLL
parsing with flexible combinators. In: Proceedings of
the 11th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference
on Software Language Engineering. SLE 2018, ACM
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/3276604.3276618

[8] Areces, C., Cassano, V., Castro, P.F., Fervari,
R.: Deontic action logics: A modular algebraic perspective. J of Log Lang and Inf (2025).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10849-025-09447-7
[9] Azzopardi, S., Pace, G.J., Schapachnik, F.: On
observing contracts: Deontic contracts meet smart
contracts. In: Palmirani, M. (ed.) Legal Knowledge
and Information Systems - JURIX 2018: The
Thirty-first Annual Conference, Groningen, The
Netherlands, 12-14 December 2018. pp. 21–30.
Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications,
IOS Press (2018). https://doi.org/10.3233/9781-61499-935-5-21,
https://doi.org/10.3233/
978-1-61499-935-5-21

[18] van Binsbergen,
L.T.,
Scott,
E.,
Johnstone, A.:
Purely Functional GLL Parsing. Journal of Computer Languages (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cola.2020.100945
[19] van Binsbergen, L.T., Verano Merino, M., Jeanjean, P., van der Storm, T., Combemale,
B., Barais, O.:
A Principled Approach to
REPL Interpreters, pp. 84–100. ACM (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3426428.3426917

[10] Aştefănoaei, L., de Boer, F., Dastani, M., Meyer,
J.J.: On the Semantics and Verification of Normative Multi-Agent Systems 15(13), 2629–2652.
https://doi.org/10.3217/jucs-015-13-2629

[20] Bonfanti, S., Riccobene, E., Scandurra, P.:
A component framework for the runtime enforcement of safety properties. Journal of
Systems and Software 198, 111605 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2022.111605

[11] Bahig, H.M., Hazber, M.A.G., Al-Utaibi, K.A.,
Nassr, D.I., Bahig, H.M.: Efficient sequential and
parallel prime sieve algorithms. Symmetry 14(12),
2527 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/SYM14122527,
https://doi.org/10.3390/sym14122527

[21] Breebaart, M.: Juriconnect standaard BWB versie
1.3.1 (Oct 2014)
[22] Breteler, J., van Gessel, T., Biagioni, G., van Doesburg, R.: The FLINT ontology: An actor-based
model of legal relations. In: Acosta, M., Peroni,
S., Vahdati, S., Gentile, A.L., Pellegrini, T., Kalo,
J. (eds.) Knowledge Graphs: Semantics, Machine
Learning, and Languages - Proceedings of the 19th
International Conference on Semantic Systems, 2022 September 2023, Leipzig, Germany. pp. 227–234.
Studies on the Semantic Web, IOS Press (2023).
https://doi.org/10.3233/SSW230016

[12] Bartocci, E., Falcone, Y., Francalanza, A., Reger, G.:
Introduction to Runtime Verification. In: Bartocci,
E., Falcone, Y. (eds.) Lectures on Runtime Verification, vol. 10457, pp. 1–33. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-75632-5_1, series Title: Lecture Notes in Computer Science
[13] van Binsbergen, L.T.: Haskell prototype implementation of the eflint language. https://gitlab.com/
eflint/haskell-implementation (2020), [Online,
accessed 01 May 2026]

[23] Byun, J.W., Bertino, E., Li, N.: Purpose based access
control of complex data for privacy protection. In:
Proceedings of the tenth ACM symposium on Access
control models and technologies. pp. 102–110 (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1145/1063979.1063998, https://
doi.org/10.1145/1063979.1063998

[14] van Binsbergen, L.T., Kebede, M.G., Baugh, J., van
Engers, T., van Vuurden, D.G.: Dynamic generation
of access control policies from social policies. Procedia Computer Science 198, 140–147 (January 2022).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2021.12.221

[24] Calimeri, F., Gebser, M., Maratea, M., Ricca, F.: Design and results of the fifth answer set programming
competition. Artif. Intell. 231, 151–181 (2016)

[15] van Binsbergen, L.T., Liu, L., van Doesburg, R., van
Engers, T.: eFLINT: A Domain-Specific Language
for Executable Norm Specifications. In: Proceedings
of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference

[25] Cavada, R., Cimatti, A., Dorigatti, M., Griggio, A.,
Mariotti, A., Micheli, A., Mover, S., Roveri, M.,
Tonetta, S.: The nuXmv Symbolic Model Checker.
25

In: Biere, A., Bloem, R. (eds.) Computer Aided
Verification. pp. 334–342. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer International Publishing.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08867-9_22

[35] Dell’Anna, D., Dastani, M., Dalpiaz, F.: Runtime revision of norms and sanctions based on
agent preferences. Proceedings of the International
Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, AAMAS 3, 1609–1617 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.65109/GQPO3105

[26] Ceci, M., Sannier, N., Abualhaija, S., Shin, D.,
Bianculli, D., Halling, M.: Toward Automated
Compliance Checking of Fund Activities Using
Runtime Verification Techniques. In: Proceedings of the 1st IEEE/ACM Workshop on Software Engineering Challenges in Financial Firms.
pp. 19–20. ACM, Lisbon Portugal (Apr 2024).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3643665.3648045

[36] van Doesburg, R., van Engers, T.: The false, the
former, and the parish priest. In: Proceedings of the
Seventeenth International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Law. pp. 194–198. ICAIL 2019, ACM
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3322640.3326718
[37] van Doesburg, R., van der Storm, T., van Engers,
T.: CALCULEMUS: Towards a formal language for
the interpretation of normative systems. In: AI4J
Workshop at ECAI 2016. pp. 73–77. AI4J 2016 (2016)

[27] Ceri, S., Gottlob, G., Tanca, L.: What you always
wanted to know about datalog (and never dared to
ask). IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 1(1), 146–166
(1989). https://doi.org/10.1109/69.43410

[38] Erdem, E., Gelfond, M., Leone, N.: Applications of
answer set programming. AI Magazine 37(3), 53–68
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v37i3.2678

[28] Charalambides, M., Flegkas, P., Pavlou, G., Bandara, A.K., Lupu, E., Russo, A., Dulay, N., Sloman, M., Rubio-Loyola, J.: Policy conflict analysis
for quality of service management. In: 6th IEEE
International Workshop on Policies for Distributed
Systems and Networks (POLICY 2005), 6-8 June
2005, Stockholm, Sweden. pp. 99–108. IEEE (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1109/POLICY.2005.23

[39] Esterhuyse, C.A.: Specification-centric Multi Agent
Systems. Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam
(2025)
[40] Esterhuyse, C.A., van Binsbergen, L.T.: Cooperative Specification via Composition Control. In:
Proceedings of the 17th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Software Language Engineering. p. 2–15. SLE ’24, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3687997.3695635

[29] Clark, K.L.: Negation as failure. In: Gallaire, H.,
Minker, J. (eds.) Logic and Data Bases, Symposium on Logic and Data Bases, Centre d’études
et de recherches de Toulouse, France, 1977. pp.
293–322. Advances in Data Base Theory, Plemum
Press, New York (1977). https://doi.org/10.1007/9781-4684-3384-5_11

[41] Esterhuyse, C.A., Müller, T., van Binsbergen, L.T.:
JustAct: Actions Universally Justified by Partial Dynamic Policies. In: Castiglioni, V., Francalanza, A. (eds.) Formal Techniques for Distributed Objects, Components, and Systems. pp.
60–81. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-62645-6_4,

[30] Clarke, E.M.: Model Checking. MIT Press, 2 edn.
[31] Clarke, E.M., Henzinger, T.A., Veith, H., Bloem,
R. (eds.): Handbook of Model Checking. Springer
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-10575-8

[42] Esterhuyse, C.A., Müller, T., van Binsbergen, L.T.:
A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN International
Conference on Generative Programming: Concepts
and Experiences. p. 80–93. GPCE ’25, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2025).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3742876.3742882

[32] Colmerauer, A., Roussel, P.: The Birth of
Prolog, p. 331–367. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (1996).
https://doi.org/10.1145/234286.1057820
[33] Corsius, M., Hoppenbrouwers, S., Lokin, M., Baars,
E., Sangers-Van Cappellen, G., Wilmont, I.: RegelSpraak: a CNL for Executable Tax Rules Specification. In: Kuhn, T., Spreeuwenberg, S., Hoppenbrouwers, S., Fuchs, N.E. (eds.) Proceedings of
the Seventh International Workshop on Controlled
Natural Language (CNL 2020/21). Special Interest
Group on Controlled Natural Language, Amsterdam,
Netherlands (Sep 2021), https://aclanthology.
org/2021.cnl-1.6/

[43] Esterhuyse, C.A., Müller, T., Van Binsbergen, L.T.,
Belloum, A.S.Z.: Exploring the enforcement of private, dynamic policies on medical workflow execution. In: 2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on e-Science (e-Science). pp. 481–486 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1109/eScience55777.2022.00086
[44] Ethereum: Solidity documentation online. https:
//solidity.readthedocs.io (2016), [Online, accessed 23 October 2025]

[34] De Geus, F.W.: Model Checking Normative Systems.
Master’s thesis, University of Amsterdam (2022)
26

[45] Fisler, K., Krishnamurthi, S., Meyerovich, L.,
Tschantz, M.: Verification and Change-Impact Analysis of Access-Control Policies. In: Proceedings of
the 27th International Conference on Software Engineering. pp. 196–205. ICSE 2005, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2005).
https://doi.org/10.1145/1062455.1062502

and declarative smart contracts, and blockchain systems. Artificial Intelligence and Law 26(4), 377–409
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-018-9223-3
[55] Governatori, G., Maher, M., Antoniou, G., Billington,
D.: Argumentation Semantics for Defeasible Logic.
Journal of Logic and Computation 14(5), 675–702
(10 2004). https://doi.org/10.1093/logcom/14.5.675

[46] Frölich, D., van Binsbergen, L.T.: A Generic BackEnd for Exploratory Programming. In: The 22nd International Symposium on Trends in Functional Programming (TFP 2021). LNCS, vol. 12834. Springer
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-83978-9_2

[56] Governatori, G., Rotolo, A.:
Changing legal systems:
Legal abrogations and annulments in Defeasible Logic 18(1), 157–194.
https://doi.org/10.1093/jigpal/jzp075
[57] Groefsema, H., Beest, N.R.T.P.v., Governatori, G.:
On the use of the conformance and compliance keywords during verification of business processes. In:
Di Ciccio, C., Dijkman, R., del Río Ortega, A.,
Rinderle-Ma, S. (eds.) Business Process Management Forum. pp. 21–37. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3031-16171-1_2

[47] Gabbay, D., Horty, J., Parent, X.: Handbook of
Deontic Logic and Normative Systems. College Publications (2013)
[48] Gebser, M., Kaminski, R., Kaufmann, B., Ostrowski,
M., Schaub, T., Wanko, P.: Theory solving made
easy with clingo 5. In: Carro, M., King, A., Saeedloei,
N., Vos, M.D. (eds.) Technical Communications of
the 32nd International Conference on Logic Programming, ICLP 2016 TCs, October 16-21, 2016, New
York City, USA. OASIcs, vol. 52, pp. 2:1–2:15. Schloss
Dagstuhl - Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik (2016).
https://doi.org/10.4230/OASICS.ICLP.2016.2

[58] Hashmi, M., Governatori, G., Lam, H., Wynn,
M.T.:
Are we done with business process
compliance: state of the art and challenges
ahead. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 57(1), 79–133 (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10115-017-1142-1

[49] Gebser, M., Kaminski, R., Kaufmann, B., Schaub,
T.: Multi-shot ASP solving with clingo. Theory Pract. Log. Program. 19(1), 27–82 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1471068418000054

[59] Herrestad, H.: Norms and formalization. In: Proceedings of the 3th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Law. pp. 175–184. ICAIL 1993, ACM
(1993). https://doi.org/10.1145/112646.112667

[50] Gebser, M., Kaufmann, B., Kaminski, R.,
Ostrowski, M., Schaub, T., Schneider, M.:
Potassco: The potsdam answer set solving collection. AI Communications 24(2), 107–124 (2011).
https://doi.org/10.3233/AIC-2011-0491

Fundamental legal concep[60] Hohfeld, W.N.:
tions as applied in judicial reasoning. The
Yale Law Journal 26(8), 710–770 (1917).
https://doi.org/10.2307/786270
[61] Hohfeld, W.: Some fundamental legal conceptions
as applied in judicial reasoning. Yale Law Journal
23(1), 59–64 (1913)

[51] Gelfond, M., Lifschitz, V.: The stable model semantics for logic programming. In: Kowalski, R.A.,
Bowen, K.A. (eds.) Logic Programming, Proceedings
of the Fifth International Conference and Symposium, Seattle, Washington, USA, August 15-19, 1988
(2 Volumes). pp. 1070–1080. MIT Press (1988)

[62] Holzmann, G.J.: The SPIN Model Checker - primer
and reference manual. Addison-Wesley (2004)
[63] Horrocks, I., Patel-Schneider, P.F., McGuinness,
D.L., Welty, C.A.: OWL: a Description-Logic-Based
Ontology Language for the Semantic Web, p. 458–486.
Cambridge University Press (2007)

[52] Goldstein, H., Hughes, J., Lampropoulos, L., Pierce,
B.C.: Do Judge a Test by its Cover. In: Yoshida,
N. (ed.) Programming Languages and Systems. pp.
264–291. Springer International Publishing (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-72019-3_10

[64] Horty, J.: Deontic modals: Why abandon the classical semantics? Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 95(4),
424–460 (2014)

[53] Gommans, L., Xu, L., Demchenko, Y., Wan, A.,
Cristea, M., Meijer, R., de Laat, C.: Multi-domain
lightpath authorization, using tokens. Future Generation Computer Systems 25(2), 153–160 (2009).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2008.07.013

[65] Hu, V.C., Kuhn, D.R., Ferraiolo, D.F.: Attributebased access control. Computer 48(2), 85–88 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2015.33

[54] Governatori, G., Idelberger, F., Milosevic, Z., Riveret,
R., Sartor, G., Xu, X.: On legal contracts, imperative
27

[66] Huttner, L., Merigoux, D.:
Catala:
Moving towards the future of legal expert systems. Artificial Intelligence and Law (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10506-022-09328-5
[67] Iannella, R., Villata, S.: ODRL information model
2.2. W3C Recommendation (2018)

[79] Lam, H.P., Hashmi, M., Scofield, B.: Enabling Reasoning with LegalRuleML. In: Alferes, J.J., Bertossi,
L., Governatori, G., Fodor, P., Roman, D. (eds.)
Rule Technologies. Research, Tools, and Applications. pp. 241–257. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-42019-6_16

[68] Jabal, A., Davari, M., Bertino, E., Makaya, C., Calo,
S., Verma, D., Russo, A., Williams, C.: Methods and
tools for policy analysis. ACM Computing Surveys
51(6) (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3295749

[80] Larman, C.: Applying UML and Patterns: An Introduction to Object-Oriented Analysis and Design and
Iterative Development (3rd Edition). Prentice Hall
PTR, USA (2004)

[69] Jackson, D.: Software Abstractions: Logic, Language,
and Analysis. The MIT Press (2006)

[81] Liu, L.C., Parizi, M.M., van Binsbergen, L.T., van
Engers, T.: Regulatory services to automate compliance with ex-post enforcement. In: Proceedings of
AI Approaches to the Complexity of Legal Systems
(AICOL) 2023. Springer (2024)

[70] Jones, A., Sergot, M.: A Formal Characterisation of Institutionalised Power. Logic Journal of the IGPL 4(3), 427–443 (06 1996).
https://doi.org/10.1093/jigpal/4.3.427
[71] Kafalý, O., Ajmeri, N., Singh, M.P.: Revani: Revising
and Verifying Normative Specifications for Privacy
31(5), 8–15. https://doi.org/10.1109/MIS.2016.89

[82] Liu, L., Sileno, G., van Engers, T.M.: Digital enforceable contracts (DEC): making
smart contracts smarter 334, 235–238 (2020).
https://doi.org/10.3233/FAIA200872

[72] Karels, J.: Design of a Framework for Storing and
Reasoning About Normative Sources with Formalised
Interpretations. Master’s thesis, University of Amsterdam (2023)

[83] Merigoux, D., Chataing, N., Protzenko, J.:
Catala: a programming language for the law.
Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 5(ICFP) (Aug 2021).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3473582

[73] Kebede, M.G., Sileno, G., Van Engers, T.: A Critical Reflection on ODRL. In: Rodríguez-Doncel,
V., Palmirani, M., Araszkiewicz, M., Casanovas,
P., Pagallo, U., Sartor, G. (eds.) AI Approaches
to the Complexity of Legal Systems XI-XII. pp. 48–
61. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-89811-3_4

[84] Mohun, J., Roberts, A.: Cracking the code: Rulemaking for humans and machines. Tech. Rep. 42, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) (2020). https://doi.org/10.1787/3afe6ba5-en
[85] Monat, R., Fromherz, A., Merigoux, D.: Formalizing date arithmetic and statically detecting
ambiguities for the law. In: Weirich, S. (ed.)
Programming Languages and Systems. pp. 421–
450. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-57267-8_16

[74] Kephart, J., Chess, D.: The vision of autonomic computing. Computer 36(1), 41–50 (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2003.1160055

[86] Müller, T., Esterhuyse, C.A., van Binsbergen, L.T.:
Source code and experimental
data for a translatfrom eflint normative specifications to clingo answer-set programs (2025).
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15188960

[75] Klyne, G., Carroll, J.J.: Resource Description Framework (RDF): Concepts and Abstract Syntax. W3C
Recommendation (2004), http://www.w3.org/TR/
2004/REC-rdf-concepts-20040210/
[76] Kowalski, R., Sergot, M.: A logic-based calculus
of events. New Generation Computing 4(1), 67–95
(1986). https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03037383, https:
//doi.org/10.1007/BF03037383

[87] Nute, D.: Defeasible logic. In: Bartenstein, O., Geske,
U., Hannebauer, M., Yoshie, O. (eds.) Web Knowledge Management and Decision Support. pp. 151–169.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2003).
https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-36524-9

[77] Kowalski, R., Dávila, J., Sartor, G., Calejo, M.:
Logical English for Law and Education, pp. 287–
299. Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35254-6_24

[88] OASIS eXtensible Access Control Markup Language
(XACML) Technical Committee: eXtensible Access
Control Markup Language (XACML) Version 3.0
Plus Errata 01 (July 2017)

[78] Krötzsch, M.: OWL 2 Profiles: An Introduction
to Lightweight Ontology Languages, pp. 112–183.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33158-9_4

[89] Osborn, S.L.: Mandatory access control and rolebased access control revisited. In: Youman, C.E.,
28

Coyne, E.J., Jaeger, T. (eds.) Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Role-Based Access Control, RBAC
1997,November 6-7, 1997. pp. 31–40. ACM (1997).
https://doi.org/10.1145/266741.266751

[98] Russo, A., Miller, R., Nuseibeh, B., Kramer, J.: An
abductive approach for analysing event-based requirements specifications. In: Stuckey, P. (ed.) Logic Programming, 18th International Conference, ICLP 2002,
Copenhagen, Denmark, July 29 - August 1, 2002,
Proceedings. LNCS, vol. 2401, pp. 22–37. Springer
(2002). https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45619-8_3

[90] Padget, J., Elakehal, E., Li, T., De Vos, M.: InstAL:
An Institutional Action Language, Law, Governance
and Technology Series, vol. 30, p. 101. Springer Verlag
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-33570-4_6

[99] Sadri, F., Kowalski, R.: Variants of the event calculus.
In: Sterling, L. (ed.) Logic Programming, Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on Logic
Programming, Tokyo, Japan, June 13-16, 1995. pp.
67–81. MIT Press (1995)

[91] Parizi, M.M., van Binsbergen, L.T., Sileno, G., van
Engers, T.: A Modular Architecture for Integrating Normative Advisors in MAS. In: Baumeister,
D., Rothe, J. (eds.) Multi-Agent Systems. pp. 312–
329. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20614-6_18

[100] Sandhu, R.S., Coyne, E.J., Feinstein, H.L.,
Youman, C.E.:
Role-based access control
models.
Computer
29(2),
38–47
(1996).
https://doi.org/10.1109/2.485845

[92] Park, J., Sandhu, R.: Towards usage control models:
beyond traditional access control. In: Proceedings
of the Seventh ACM Symposium on Access Control Models and Technologies. p. 57–64. SACMAT
’02, Association for Computing Machinery (2002).
https://doi.org/10.1145/507711.507722

[101] Sandhu, R.S., Munawer, Q.: How to do discretionary
access control using roles. In: Youman, C.E., Jaeger,
T. (eds.) Proceedings of the Third ACM Workshop
on Role-Based Access Control, RBAC. pp. 47–54.
ACM (1998). https://doi.org/10.1145/286884.286893

[93] Parvizimosaed, A., Roveri, M., Rasti, A., Anda,
A.A., Alfuhaid, S., Amyot, D., Logrippo, L., Mylopoulos, J.: SymboleoPC: checking properties of
legal contracts. Softw. Syst. Model. 24(4), 1093–1126
(2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10270-024-01180-2,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10270-024-01180-2

[102] Schouten, M., Esterhuyse, C.A.: DMI Afsprakenstelsel (version of 23 April 2026) formalisation as an eFLINT specification with a set
of test eFLINT scenarios. Zenodo (4 2026).
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19761312

[94] Prinz, W., Rose, T., Urbach, N.: Blockchain Technology and International Data Spaces, pp. 165–180.
Springer International Publishing, Cham (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93975-5_10

[103] Searle, J.: The construction of social reality. Penguin
Books (1996)
[104] Shakeri, S., Maccatrozzo, V., Veen, L., Bakhshi,
R., Gommans, L., de Laat, C., Grosso, P.:
Modeling and matching digital data marketplace
policies. In: 2019 15th International Conference on eScience (eScience). pp. 570–577 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/eScience.2019.00078

[95] Rasti, A., Anda, A.A., Alfuhaid, S., Parvizimosaed,
A., Amyot, D., Roveri, M., Logrippo, L., Mylopoulos, J.: Automated generation of smart contract
code from legal contract specifications with Symboleo2SC. Softw. Syst. Model. 24(4), 1127–1156
(2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/S10270-024-01187-9

[105] Sharifi, S., Parvizimosaed, A., Amyot, D., Logrippo, L., Mylopoulos, J.: Symboleo: Towards
a Specification Language for Legal Contracts. In:
Breaux, T.D., Zisman, A., Fricker, S., Glinz,
M. (eds.) 28th IEEE International Requirements
Engineering Conference, RE 2020, August 31 September 4, 2020. pp. 364–369. IEEE (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1109/RE48521.2020.00049

[96] Rodríguez-Doncel, V., Villata, S., Gómez-Pérez, A.:
A dataset of RDF licenses. In: Hoekstra, R. (ed.)
Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 2014: The Twenty-Seventh Annual Conference,
Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland, 10-12 December 2014. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and
Applications, vol. 271, pp. 187–188. IOS Press (2014).
https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-468-8-187

[106] Steen, A., Fuenmayor, D.: Bridging Between
LegalRuleML and TPTP for Automated Normative Reasoning. In: Governatori, G., Turhan,
A.Y. (eds.) Rules and Reasoning. pp. 244–260.
Springer International Publishing, Cham (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-21541-4_16

[97] Ross, K.A.: Modular stratification and magic sets for
DATALOG programs with negation. In: Rosenkrantz,
D.J., Sagiv, Y. (eds.) Proceedings of the Ninth ACM
SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Symposium on Principles of Database Systems, April 2-4, 1990, Nashville,
Tennessee, USA. pp. 161–171. ACM Press (1990).
https://doi.org/10.1145/298514.298558

[107] Steketee, M., Verheijen, N., van Binsbergen, L.T.:
Managing Administrative Law Cases using an Adaptable Model-driven Norm-enforcing Tool. Proceed29

ings of AI4Access2Justice at JURIX’24 (2024).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.24822
[108] Szabo, N.: Formalizing and securing relationships
on public networks. First Monday 2(9) (1997).
https://doi.org/10.5210/fm.v2i9.548
[109] Tuler De Oliveira, M., Reis, L.H.A., Verginadis,
Y., Mattos, D.M.F., Olabarriaga, S.D.: SmartAccess: Attribute-Based Access Control System for Medical Records Based on Smart Contracts. IEEE Access 10, 117836–117854 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3217201
[110] Valkering, O., Cushing, R., Belloum, A.:
Brane:
A framework for programmable orchestration of multi-site applications. In:
2021 IEEE 17th International Conference
on eScience (eScience). pp. 277–282 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/eScience51609.2021.00056
[111] van der Aalst, W.: Process mining: discovery, conformance and enhancement of business processes. Springer,
Germany (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-19345-3
[112] Van Gelder, A., Ross, K.A., Schlipf, J.S.: The
well-founded semantics for general logic programs.
Journal of the ACM 38(3), 619–649 (Jul 1991).
https://doi.org/10.1145/116825.116838
[113] Viganò, F., Colombetti, M.: Symbolic model
checking of institutions. pp. 35–44. ACM Press.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1282100.1282109
[114] Vos, M.D., Kirrane, S., Padget, J.A., Satoh, K.:
ODRL Policy Modelling and Compliance Checking.
In: Fodor, P., Montali, M., Calvanese, D., Roman,
D. (eds.) Rules and Reasoning - Third International
Joint Conference, RuleML+RR 2019, Bolzano, Italy,
September 16-19, 2019, Proceedings. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 11784, pp. 36–51. Springer
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-31095-0_3
[115] Wood, D.: Ethereum: a secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger (2014)
[116] Ågotnes, T., van der Hoek, W., Rodríguez-Aguilar,
J.A., Sierra, C., Wooldridge, M.: A Temporal Logic
of Normative Systems. In: Makinson, D., Malinowski,
J., Wansing, H. (eds.) Towards Mathematical Philosophy: Papers from the Studia Logica Conference
Trends in Logic IV, pp. 69–106. Springer Netherlands.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-9084-4_5

30

