UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking
Scenarios
Esterhuyse, Christopher A.; Müller, Tim; van Binsbergen, L.T.
DOI
10.1145/3742876.3742882
Publication date
2025
Document Version
Final published version
Published in
GPCE '25
License
CC BY
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Esterhuyse, C. A., Müller, T., & van Binsbergen, L. T. (2025). A Stable Model Semantics for
eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios. In A. Shaikhha, S. Erdweg, & N.
Amin (Eds.), GPCE '25: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on
Generative Programming: Concepts and Experiences : July 3-4, 2025, Bergen, Norway (pp.
80-93). Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1145/3742876.3742882

General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: https://uba.uva.nl/en/contact, or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, P.O. Box 19185, 1000 GD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
You will be contacted as soon as possible.
UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam (https://dare.uva.nl)
Download date:21 Sep 2026

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm
Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios
Christopher A. Esterhuyse

Tim Müller

L. Thomas van Binsbergen

c.a.esterhuyse@uva.nl
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands

t.muller@uva.nl
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands

ltvanbinsbergen@acm.org
University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, Netherlands

Abstract

ACM, New York, NY, USA, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/374287
6.3742882

Since its introduction at GPCE2020, the eFLINT norm specification language has been used in academic and industrial
applications to specify and automate compliance for various
norms, such as privacy regulations and data processing agreements. The eFLINT interpreter has been used to automate
the analysis of real-time or historical cases by computing
logical consequences and reporting normative violations.
To support future language and tooling developments, we
contribute a formal definition of the language as a translation to first-order logic programming with stable model
semantics. The described semantics aligns with the previous
semi-formal descriptions of the language, but resolves issues
relating to logical inference with negative antecedent and
aggregation operators. Specifically, we formalise the connection between eFLINT’s derivation rules and Horn clauses
under the stable model semantics. Secondly, by repurposing
the Clingo answer-set solver as a highly-optimised eFLINT
interpreter, we extend the toolset for eFLINT with modelchecking abstract properties in addition to case analysis.
We evaluate the new semantics and interpreter via an
empirical comparison of the existing implementation to our
prototype implementation. We observe that the expected
subset of our tests have the equivalent behaviours.

1

Introduction

The eFLINT language, first introduced at GPCE2020, is a
domain-specific specification language designed to enable
(static and dynamic) reasoning with interpretations of normative documents such as laws, regulations, and contracts [34].
eFLINT has been used in research of normative multi-agent
systems [24, 37], distributed data processing systems [9, 16,
32, 33], and to develop partially automated data governance
solutions [2, 35]. In these cases, the language has been used to
specify, for example, data processing and consortium agreements, data access or usage conditions, and parts of the
European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [10].
From the start, eFLINT was designed to bridge the gap
between normative concepts typically expressed by legal
experts, and event-driven software systems requiring legal
regulation. Its high level of abstraction lets eFLINT serve as a
lingua franca for norms from various domains. For example,
once encoded in eFLINT, smart contracts, EU data protection regulations, and organisational policies have meaningful
compositions [33]. The eFLINT interpreter, available online1 ,
checks compliance of a given eFLINT scenario against a given
eFLINT specification. Scenarios instantiate specifications by
laying out the events that happen(ed). Precisely, the tool computes logical consequences and enumerates the normative
violations: unmet obligations and prohibited actions.
Section 2 explains the eFLINT language in more detail. Until then, we exemplify the typical usage of the language; the
eFLINT interpreter monitors the compliance of a software
system by checking system traces (modelled as scenarios) for
compliance against regulatory norms (modelled as a specification). Example 1 introduces our running example of such
a usage; in this case, the specification captures the norm that
data users must inform data controllers of (the purpose of
their) data accesses within a given time frame.

CCS Concepts: • Applied computing → Law; Enterprise
modeling; • Software and its engineering → Domain
specific languages; Semantics; • Theory of computation
→ Constraint and logic programming; Automated reasoning.
Keywords: norm, specification languages, dynamic semantics, logic programming, model checking, answer set solving
ACM Reference Format:
Christopher A. Esterhuyse, Tim Müller, and L. Thomas van Binsbergen. 2025. A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios. In Proceedings of the 24th
ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Generative Programming:
Concepts and Experiences (GPCE ’25), July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway.

Example 1 (Running Example eFLINT Usage). A system
is regulated by the following specification, which expresses:
accessors of datasets must notify the dataset’s controllers (or
the administrator by default) within ten time steps of the access.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
GPCE ’25, Bergen, Norway
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1995-0/25/07
https://doi.org/10.1145/3742876.3742882

1 The Haskell implementation sees active development. But we focus on the
version authored on the 13th of February 2025: https://gitlab.com/eflint/hask
ell-implementation/-/blob/cfe73e9a0ed594e384027ea29529da62dab1fe0f

80

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

C. A. Esterhuyse, T. Müller, and L. T. van Binsbergen

// These lines define three basic data types
Fact instant Identified by Int
Fact user
Identified by String
// ' controller ' is defined as a 'user ' alias soon
// For each controls that holds , its controller holds .
Derived from ( Foreach controls: controls . controller )
Fact dataset Identified by String
Derived from ( Foreach controls: controls . dataset )

The eFLINT language is motivated, described, and demonstrated in research articles [33, 34]. The syntax and fundamentals of the semantics are defined using conventional
mathematical notation and precise natural language. For
example, [34] makes clear that each specification denotes
an action-labelled transition system, and that each scenario
denotes a sequence of actions that traces a path through the
transition system. Figure 1 visualises a scenario.

// Introduces aliases for users and instants
Placeholder controller For user
Placeholder deadline
For instant
// ( Mutable ) relations over users , instants , and datasets
Fact elapsed Identified by instant
Fact controls Identified by controller * dataset
// For each dataset that holds , the admin controls it
// if there exists no non - admin user that controls it .
Derived from ( Foreach dataset:
controls ( user ( " Admin " ) , dataset )
Where Not ( Exists user:
user != user ( " Admin " ) && controls ( user , dataset )))

𝑠1

𝑡1

𝑠2

𝑡2

𝑠3

𝑡3

𝑠4

𝑖1

𝑎 1 ∪ 𝑖 1′

𝑖2

𝑎 2 ∪ 𝑖 2′

𝑖3

𝑎 3 ∪ 𝑖 3′

𝑖4

Figure 1. A trace through states 𝑠 1−4 over transitions 𝑡 1−3 , induced by a scenario triggering actions [𝑎 1, 𝑎 2, 𝑎 3 ] in sequence.
Each state and transition models the (current) normative relationships as (elements of) some structured data base 𝑖.

Act access Actor user Related to dataset , instant
Derived from ( Foreach user , controls , instant:
access ( user , controls . dataset , instant ))
// When triggered , the access has these effects
Creates ( Foreach controls:
must_notify ( user , controls . controller ,
access ( user , dataset , instant ) , instant + 10)
Where controls . dataset == dataset )

However, at time of writing, some language features are
not rigorously defined. For example, the eFLINT description in [34] suffices for users to agree that the syntactic
term Derived from (Foreach dataset: ...) in Example 1 denotes an
eFLINT derivation clause which gives the administrator control of datasets which have no other controllers. But some
details remain unclear. Does the administrator retain control
over the X-Rays once Amy has successfully claimed control?
In the original interpreter, querying ?controls("Admin","X-Rays")
after Example 1 yields query successful; the administrator appears to retain control. But this behaviour conflicts with
the plausible interpretation of what is documented in [34]:
derivation clauses should apply (only) when their conditions
are satisfied. The identified issue is that negation (Not), universal quantification (Forall), and aggregation (e.g., Max) exhibit
unspecified (thus unexpected) behaviour. For example, the
outcome of the query is flipped if user is named agent instead.
In this article, we (re)define the eFLINT semantics. Our
goal is to formalise eFLINT’s existing semantic concepts in
detail, such that eFLINT scenarios and specifications have
unique and unambiguous meanings. We select an intuitive
and mature foundation: first-order logic programming under the stable model semantics [13]. This is also pragmatic
choice, as it lets us leverage existing logic programming
tools. Precisely, we define the semantics of eFLINT with a
translation to the Clingo language, i.e., the input language
of the Clingo answer-set solver tool. Thus, eFLINT inherits
the clarity of the Clingo semantics, and we repurpose the
Clingo solver as our new eFLINT interpreter.
We recreate the existing eFLINT descriptions and interpreter as much as possible. Specifically, we realise the description in [34] by aligning key eFLINT constructs with the
inference rules (Horn clauses) of logic programming. Thus,
users are afforded powerful, (de)compositional reasoning
about scenarios and systems via specifications. As part of

// Facts , but their elements are conditionally violated
Duty must_notify Holder user Claimant controller
Related to access , deadline
// Predicates when these duties are violated
Violated when Holds ( elapsed ( deadline ))
Act notify Actor user Recipient controller
Related to must_notify Terminates must_notify
Derived from ( Foreach must_notify: notify (
must_notify . user , must_notify . controller , must_notify ))

The following eFLINT scenario models a hypothetical system
configuration just after user Bob accesses the X-Ray dataset.
+dataset ("X - Rays " ).
+controls ( user (" Amy " ) , dataset ( "X - Rays " )).
+instant (9).
+user (" Bob " ).
access ( user (" Bob ") , dataset ( "X - Rays " ) , 9).

Given the above input, the eFLINT interpreter emits the following output, showing the consequences of each scenario step in
turn: derived created (derived) instances, and that Bob’s access
action is ultimately permitted (enabled).
+dataset ("X - Rays " ).
| +user (" Admin ")
| +controls ( user (" Admin " ) , dataset ( "X - Rays " ))
+controls ( user (" Amy " ) , dataset ( "X - Rays " )).
| user (" Amy ")
+user (" Bob " ).
+instant (9).
| +access ( user (" Admin " ) , dataset ( "X - Rays " ) , instant (9))
| +access ( user (" Amy " ) , dataset ( "X - Rays " ) , instant (9))
| +access ( user (" Bob " ) , dataset ( "X - Rays " ) , instant (9))
access ( user (" Bob ") , dataset ( "X - Rays " ) , instant (9)) ENABLED
| +notify ( user (" Bob " ) , user ( " Admin " ) , ... , instant (19)))
| +must_notify ( user ( " Bob " ) , user ( " Admin " ) , ... )
| +notify ( user (" Bob " ) , user ( " Amy " ) , ... , instant (19)))
| +must_notify ( user ( " Bob " ) , user ( " Amy " ) , ... , instant (19))

81

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios

2

this (re)design, we make two changes relative to the existing eFLINT interpreter. Firstly, the ambiguity of the original
description regarding the semantics of derivation clauses
with negation, iteration and aggregation is resolved. We do
so by connecting these constructions to the literature on
(the challenges of) reasoning with negated conditions in
logic programming. In the running example, the result is
that control over a dataset is exclusive to controllers or to
the administrator (if there are no controllers). Secondly, we
leverage our translation to Clingo to support a new, more
general use case for eFLINT: via Clingo, our tool searches for
scenarios with user-defined properties. For example, ‘find all
counterexamples to the proposition: scenarios taking only
permitted actions violate no duties’. This use case has many
practical applications, e.g., in model-checking and recommendation, and is already popular with languages related to
eFLINT, such as Symboleo [25] and FIEVEL [36].
We formulate our translation from eFLINT to Clingo as the
multi-stage translation pipeline shown in Figure 2. This helps
to structure our presentation. But moreover, it introduces
novel intermediate representations which are useful in their
own right. For example, Core eFLINT is entirely embedded
in Clingo, but it captures much of th eFLINT semantics, and
unifies eFLINT specifications with scenarios.
Concretely, this article makes the following contributions:

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

Translation Source Language: eFLINT

Normative Specification Languages in General. Each
(formal) specification language affords the systematic development of complex artifacts called specifications. The rigour
of a formal language definitions is useful because it ensures
that each specification has a precise, unambiguous meaning.
Automated analyses can then reveal or confirm (un)desirable
properties of specifications and the concepts they model. For
example, a formal specification of a communication protocol
can be used to regulate a distributed system; events that
deviate from the specification can be ruled out beforehand,
monitored, or audited via the inspection of system logs.
Normative specification languages are designed to model
norms that regulate social systems, e.g., laws and contracts.
These languages formalise notions of permission, prohibition,
and obligation, and their tools perform systematic reasoning
and case analysis. Languages based on Hohfeld’s legal framework [4, 8], such as Symboleo [26, 30] and eFLINT [33, 34]
are action-oriented, formalising mutable relations between
institutional entities: their powers and duties to act. The focus
on actions affords the specification and control over software
systems’ interactions with the social world. Such systems
are also beholden to norms; e.g., systems processing personal
data may be subjected to the GDPR.
The eFLINT Language. Here, we give a brief account of
the eFLINT language constructs and how they afford the
modelling of (normative) domains of discourse. Throughout,
we exemplify concepts with the running example Example 1.
Each specification lays the ontological foundations of the
model as a collection of record-type definitions. E.g., controls
is a record with controller and dataset fields. Each type is also
defined alongside a collection of clauses, which instantiate
these types, identifying particular (relationships between)
entities. For example, controls(agent("Amy"),dataset("X-Rays")) is
an instance of controls. The specification models the system
by building up a collection of current instances. However,
instances never occur alone; they are always contextualised
by an attribute, such as holds or actViol. Users of the language (statically) agree on how these attributes are interpreted as modalities. For example, instances with actViol
witness particular cases of violating actions, because they
were not permitted when they were triggered. Later, we
see how the eFLINT semantics formalises such meanings
by inferring some attributes from others. For example, by
definition, instances with created also have enabled. Users
model systems by defining clauses like (Derived from ...) and
(Terminates ...) to capture different normative abstractions. For
example, associating Derived from (Foreach user...)) to the access
type, the user associates derived to access(-type) instances.
Clauses are evaluated in the context of a concrete current
state. The states only become concrete when the specification is evaluated alongside a scenario. The scenario lays out
the instance-attribute pair which gets each successive state

• A translational semantics for eFLINT specifications
and scenarios with first-order logic programming and
stable model semantics as the semantic domain.
• An implementation of our semantics that leverages
the Clingo solver for reasoning.
• A Clingo-embedded, domain-specific, core language
for reasoning with dynamic facts, acts and violations.
• An evaluation of contributions by confirming the expected input/output (in)equalities of the interpreters.
Our artefact [19] at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15188
959 includes our implementation and experimental data.
This article proceeds as follows. Sections 2 and 3 give
accounts for eFLINT and Clingo, the source and target languages of our translation, and their respective background
literature. Sections 4 to 7 build up the translation stages
‘bottom-up’, i.e., we build layers of abstraction atop Clingo.
The stage in Section 7 handles the two forms of reasoning:
scenario-compliance and scenario-search. Section 8 evaluates our contributions, and Section 9 identifies related and
future work, before Section 10 concludes.

spec. × scenario =⇒ 𝑒𝐹 𝐿𝐼 𝑁𝑇 core −→ state trace −→ Clingo
Figure 2. Translation from an eFLINT specification-scenario
pair to Clingo via the intermediate eFLINT core and state
trace abstractions (=⇒ = translation, −→ = dependency).

82

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

C. A. Esterhuyse, T. Müller, and L. T. van Binsbergen

of 𝑎 to a proof of ¬𝑎. E.g., wet(Day) :- rainy(Day), not sunny(Day)
expresses that ‘rainy but not sunny days are wet’. Languages
supporting weak negation must address the absence of a
canonical (i.e., unique) semantic interpretation for certain
syntactically valid rules like p :- not p. Many solutions have
been explored in the literature. Some languages opt to simply
disallow these programs. Answer-set solvers like Clingo generally embrace the lack of a unique interpretation and simply
enumerate all the separate stable models as alternative answers. Intuitively, this enumerates the possible combinations
of assignments to logical variables (‘models’) that satisfy each
program rule. For example, p :- not p has zero stable models
as none satisfies this contradictory rule.
Clingo’s answer-set semantics supports the expression of
(integrity) constraints over the values of logical variables.
These take the form of rules with no explicit consequent,
which condition the truth of ⊥: logical inconsistency. For
example, :- not wet(monday) asserts that ‘it is inconsistent to
assume that Monday is not wet’ or, more intuitively, ‘Monday
must be wet’. We use such constraints in Sections 4 and 5 to
protect the abstractions in our intermediate representations.
In each stage, we argue that the constraints of prior stages
are satisfied, documenting semantic properties.
Clingo admits (syntactically) nested terms. For example,
rule controls(agent("Amy"), dataset(D)) :- dataset(D) is admissible.
In the literature, this feature is also called function symbols; reflecting the distinction between the function symbol
constants of nested terms (e.g., agent above) in contrast to
predicate symbols (e.g., controls above); only the latter construct terms that are valuated by the model. Some formalisms
emphasise their separation by drawing these symbols from
different alphabets, but like eFLINT and Clingo, we do not
(e.g., dataset above acts as a function and predicate symbol).
Regardless, the ability to nest terms affords significant modularity in definitions. Consider how controls(user,dataset) in
Example 1 is independent of the syntactic structure of users.
We exploit Clingo’s convenient tuple terms, which effectively have the empty function symbol. E.g., (agent,"Amy")
approximates agent("Amy"), but only in the former can agent
bind variables. Note that Clingo forbids tuple consequents
or antecedents, so rule f(x) :- x is valid but (f,x) :- x is not.
Unfortunately, by supporting nested terms, inference is
not guaranteed to terminate. This problem has no straightforward solution [28], and we make no attempt to solve it.
Instead, we inherit the behaviour of the current eFLINT interpreter and Clingo alike: the evaluation of some programs
simply does not terminate. For example, the Clingo interpreter diverges on input f(f(X)) :- f(X). f(0). Intuitively, these
programs denote infinitely large models. In Section 6, we
address the only threat to the termination of our programs:
user-defined eFLINT-derivation and -synchronisation rules.
Like eFLINT, Clingo provides integer theory. Integer
operators (e.g., < , + , - ) and integer and string constants (e.g.,
100, "Douglas") are constant symbols given special treatment;

started. Typically, the attribute is trigger, such that the instance identifies an action that happens in transition to the
next state. E.g., because access is marked Act, its instances can
be triggered. Some attributes have effects that persist over
subsequent states. E.g., when triggered, access instances create
new control instances, which persist until they are terminated.
Thus, eFLINT models complex and stateful cyber-social
systems, unambiguously specifies which states are (not) desirable, and lays out the details of concrete scenarios.

3

Translation Target Language: Clingo

Logic- and Answer-Set-Programming. The logic programming paradigm operationalises formal logics: logical
theories correspond to declarative programs, and the search
for proofs of formulae corresponds to program execution
and expression evaluation. Different logic programming languages and tools strike different compromises between language expressivity, runtime characteristics, guarantees, and
so on. For example, [6] overviews the work and tools around
the Datalog language, which sees active study and application; consider the PhD thesis of André Pecak in 2024 [23].
Answer-set-programming (or -solving) is a form of logic
programming with an emphasis on modelling complex problems via rich language features. The name comes from the
basis on the answer-set semantics, which is also called the
stable model semantics [13]. This semantics is characterised
by attributing a set of stable models to each program; each is
interpreted as a solution to the search problem. [12] studies
the formulation of search problems in these languages.
Clingo is an answer-set solving language and toolset [11].
It is well-known in the answer-set solving community for
its maturity and its high performance in solving; e.g., [5]
reports on the results of an answer-set competition where
various Clingo components outcompeted similar tools.
Features of The Target Fragment of Clingo. Recall Figure 2: we ultimately define the semantics of eFLINT by translating arbitrary eFLINT specifications and scenarios to Clingo
programs: rule sets in the Clingo language. Thus, eFLINT
acquires the stable model semantics that underlies Clingo.
Here, we explain the features of Clingo that we target with
our translation. Section 9 discusses the potential to target
other languages (e.g., Soufflé) with many of these features.
We pervasively use Clingo’s general logic programming features, e.g., these are shared with Datalog. Each rule
asserts that the truth of a consequent term (or ‘conclusion’) is
implied by the conjunction of listed antecedent terms (or ‘conditions’). Each rule denotes a set of concrete rules for all substitutions of the variables. E.g., wet(Day) :- rainy(Day), cold(Day)
expresses that ‘rainy and cold days are wet’. The :- can be
omitted from rules with no conditions.
Clingo admits negated antecedents, matching not 𝑎, expressing weak negation or negation by default of 𝑎: the inability to infer the truth of 𝑎, i.e., promoting the unprovability

83

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios

the operators are concretely denoted in infix position, and
their applications are normalised under evaluation, as one
is likely to expect. For example, in Clingo and eFLINT, 3 + 1
normalises to 4 and 0 < 1 holds true.
Section 6 relies on (and discusses and demonstrates) features that make individual Clingo rules more expressive.
Firstly, we use conditioned conditions (or ‘nested rules’)
such as (b : c, d nested in) a :- b : c, d ; e. Thus we model
disjunctive conditions; e.g., x : not y models 𝑥 ∨ 𝑦 (𝑥 ← ¬𝑦).
Note that (:) and (,) are the nested counterparts of (:-) and
(;), respectively. Secondly, nested rules can be aggregated
by a preceding #sum, #count, #max, or #min, yielding integers. For
example, f(1) :- 0 = #count{x : f(N)} is contradictory.
Section 7 relies on a feature of Clingo that is atypical outside of answer-set solving: rules with disjunct consequents.
For example, the Clingo rule {a}. supports but does not imply
that a is true. There are two stable models: either nothing is
true, or only a is true. Section 7 demonstrates how we use
these rules to encode search spaces of eFLINT scenarios.

4

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

Notation 1 (Semantic Rules in Clingo). As per the tradition of formal languages, when they encode our semantics, we
notate Clingo rules in the style of the Gentzen-style sequent
calculus or natural deduction. For brevity, we fuse rules with
identical antecedents by conjoining their consequents. E.g., we
𝑓 ∧𝑔 (𝑃,𝑄 )
notate a :- f ; g(P,Q) and b(Q) :- f ; g(P,Q) together as 𝑎∧𝑏 (𝑄 ) .
⊤
in(𝐹, 𝑆) state(𝑆) ∧ 1 < 𝑆 state(𝑆) ∧ 0 ≮ 𝑆
state(1) state(𝑆)
state(𝑆 − 1)
⊥
in(add (𝐹 ), 𝑆) ∧ ¬in(rem(𝐹 ), 𝑆) ∧ state(𝑆 + 1)
(inertia)
in(𝐹, 𝑆 + 1) ∧ in(add (𝐹 ), 𝑆 + 1)
Figure 3. Semantics of state traces encoded as Clingo rules,
defining the contiguity of state-identifiers in {1, 2, 3, ..., 𝑛},
and encoding the inertia axiom of the event calculus: each
add (𝐹 ) implies the truth of fluent 𝐹 until after rem(𝐹 ).
Definition 1 (state-internal). Rule 𝑟 is state-internal iff, for
each antecedent identical to in(𝐹, 𝑆) for some 𝐹 and 𝑆, each
consequent of 𝑟 is identical to in(𝐹 ′, 𝑆) for some 𝐹 ′ .

State Traces

Example 2 (state-internal rules). Intuitively, state-internal
rules do not let truths of the form in(𝐹, 𝑆) ‘leak’ out of 𝑆.
• Rule in(f,S) :- state(S) is state-internal because no antecedent matches in(𝐹 ,𝑆 ) for any 𝐹 and 𝑆.
• Rule in(x,S) :- in(y,S) ; f(y) is state-internal because
in(x,S) is identical to in(𝑌 ,s) where 𝑌 = x.
• Rule in'(x,S) :- in(y,S) is not state-internal because constant in' is not identical to constant in.
• Rule in(x,1) :- in(y,S) is not state-internal because constant 1 is not identical to variable S.

Essentials of the Event Calculus. eFLINT models dynamic (normative) systems as event-labelled transition systems as was visualised in Figure 1. The original article [34]
explicitly bases this approach on the event calculus, a logical
theory for modelling dynamic systems. It formalises notions
of state, fluent, and their relation as (holds) in ⊆ fluent × state.
The fundamental notion of inertia is formalised as an axiom,
formalising ‘the truth-value of fluents persist from each state
to the next until it is acted upon’, where actions and states
are (inter-)related by a (partial) ordering on times. Particular
systems are modelled by naming actions and specifying their
effects: how they change truth in the future as a function of
truth at present. Particular scenarios are modelled by causing
particular actions to happen at particular times.

Example 3 (example Clingo rules defining a state trace).
When the following rules are input to the Clingo interpreter
along with the state-trace semantic rules (Figure 3), the output is as visualised below: the states, transitions, and fluents
comprising a particular state trace. We colour each term red
or black iff it is the conclusion of an example or state-trace
semantic rule, respectively. The figure uses ctl(𝑋 ) as an abbreviation for the Clingo term controls(𝑋 ,"X-Rays").

State Traces. We capture this fundamental layer of the
eFLINT semantics in our most abstract intermediate representation: state traces. Each state trace characterises a single
eFLINT scenario. We adopt a simplistic model, in which
many features of the event and situation calculi coincide: the
system is unfolded as a sequence of states, indexed by a finite
prefix of the natural numbers {1, 2, 3, ..., 𝑛}. We use Clingo’s
integer theory for traversing and comparing states: (𝑆 + 1) is
the successor of state 𝑆, and (<) orders states. We likewise
index the sequence of transitions, i.e., each 𝑖 in 1 ≤ 𝑖 < 𝑛
identifies the 𝑖th transition from state 𝑖 to state 𝑖 + 1. We
denote the truth fluent 𝐹 in state 𝑆 as in(𝐹, 𝑆); note how we
colour these (ubiquitous) in terms to aid readability.
Figure 3 lays out the semantics of state traces as a Clingo
rule set. The first four rules characterise the states: state
predicates some non-empty and contiguous prefix of the
natural numbers. Rule (inertia) models the main axiom
of the event calculus: 𝐹 is true in each state where it was

in ( add ( controls ( user ( " Amy " ) , dataset ( " X-Rays " ))) , 1).
in ( rem ( controls ( user ( " Amy " ) , dataset ( " X-Rays " ))) , 2).
state (3) . state (4).
in ( dataset ( D) , S) :- in ( controls (A , D) , S) .
in ( other_control ( D) ,S ) :in ( controls (A , D) , S) , not user ( " Admin " ) = A.
in ( controls ( user ( " Admin " ) ,D) , S) :in ( dataset ( D ) , S) , not in ( other_control ( D ) ,S ).
rem(ctl( "Amy") )
add(ctl( "Amy") )

1
ctl( "Admin")

1

add(ctl( "Amy") )

2

2

ctl( "Amy")
other_control("X-Rays")

84

3
ctl( "Admin")

3

4
ctl( "Admin")

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

C. A. Esterhuyse, T. Müller, and L. T. van Binsbergen

added (with add (𝐹 )) more recently than it was removed
(with rem(𝐹 )). Note that this holds even in cases where the
same 𝐹 is added and removed simultaneously, in which case
the removal suppresses addition (which results in simpler semantic rules than the alternative). Truths in(add (𝑋 ), 𝑆) and
in(rem(𝑋 ), 𝑆) have no direct influence on in(𝑋, 𝑆), but rather
affect the truth of 𝑋 in state 𝑆 + 1 and onwards. It is helpful to
think of in(add (𝑋 ), 𝑆) and in(rem(𝑋 ), 𝑆) as attributes of the
transition indexed by 𝑆, which goes from state 𝑆 to state 𝑆 + 1.
The library defined in Figure 3 affords the definition of
state traces using add and rem in rules to control the presence/absence of fluents in states. The following definition
describes a syntactic property over rules that ensures truths
about the presence/absence of fluents in one state cannot be
used to conclude the presence/absence of fluents in another
state; only Rule (inertia) is allowed to do this.
Example 3 defines a state trace using only state-internal
rules atop the state-trace semantics. The example demonstrates the behaviour of state traces in general, by modelling
a facet of the running example in particular (Example 1):
Amy sometimes controls the X-Rays dataset, and the administrator controls datasets that have no other controller.
Owing to the stable model semantics, the natural language
description is captured precisely by these rules and the conditions of the administrator’s control are clear: per state, the
administrator controls "X-Rays" if and only if Amy does not.

5

or consequents of Core eFLINT semantic rules in Figure 4; i.e.,
they are input and output of the library, resp.
A𝑡 create, terminate, obfuscate, actTrigger, actViol, trigger
A𝑠 created, terminated, holds, enabled, dutyViol,
derived, suppressed, violated, enum
Precisely, Figure 4 defines the semantics of Core eFLINT.
These rules relate the attributes of each instance. Note that
these rules are all state-internal (Definition 1); (only) the
above rules in Figure 4 use add and rem to relate the present
and future attributes of each instance. Intuitively, the ephemeral truth of transition-attributes (in A𝑡 ) (like create) affect
the persistent truth of state-attributes (in A𝑠 ) (like created)
and enabled. It is helpful to think of in((𝐴, 𝐼 ), 𝑁 ) as labelling
the 𝑁 th transition when 𝐴 is a transition attribute, i.e., labelling the transition from the 𝑁 th state to the 𝑁 + 1st state.
Rules in Figure 4 are clustered into {above, below, right},
formalising three conceptually distinct semantic facets of
the original eFLINT. We discuss each in turn.
(When added to Figure 3) the above rules in Figure 4 relate fluents with transition attributes create, terminate, and
obfuscate to the post-state. For example, in((create, 𝑋 ), 𝑆)
implies adding in((created, 𝑋 ), 𝑆 + 1). The obfuscation of instances is not represented explicitly; it is implied by the
absence of created and terminated. Thus, Core eFLINT captures a form of three-value logic. The conditions on these
rules recreate eFLINT’s existing, static prioritisation of different effects: termination is prioritised over obfuscation, and
creation over obfuscation and termination.
The below rules in Figure 4 attribute holds and enabled
to instances, based on whether the instances is created, terminated, obfuscated, derived, or suppressed. The two rules
attributing ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑑𝑠 to instances show the distinct roles of creation and termination; in summary, instance 𝑋 holds if it is
either derived (and not terminated or suppressed) or created,
thus abstracting away the details on how the truth of 𝑋 was
established. The enabled instances hold while not suppressed.
Suppression lets eFLINT users express conditions that must
always be true for an instance to be enabled, regardless of its
other attributes. In practice, this lets (the creators of) eFLINT
specifications (which use suppress) constrain the enabled
actions, despite their lack of control over (the creators of)
eFLINT scenarios (which use create).
Finally, the right rules in Figure 4 define eFLINT’s dual
notions of normative violation. Duty violations arise in states
when instances are enabled while their violations conditions
are met. Action violations arise in transitions when action
instances are triggered despite being disabled. Note how
the enabled attribute occurs in both rules; intuitively, it lets
agents use the (finite) enabled instances in each state to
guide their search for extensions to the scenario that avoid
violations. For example, if a duty for Amy is enabled, Amy
should seek to terminate the duty before it is violated. If
an action for Amy is enabled, Amy can perform the action

Core eFLINT

The library defined in this section can simultaneously be seen
as a Clingo-embedded domain-specific language (EDSL) and
as a core-language underneath eFLINT as one of possibly
many surface-languages. In Sections 6 and 7 the library is
used as a target language in a translation from eFLINT. As
a separately useful EDSL, the library can be used to model
dynamically evolving scenarios and reason with the general
notions of action- and duty-compliance as defined in [34].
Core eFLINT refines the prior state trace abstraction; as
before, fluents are related to states by the in relation. But
now each fluent 𝐹 is an attribute-instance pair (𝐴, 𝐼 ), i.e., each
in((𝐴, 𝐼 ), 𝑆) attributes 𝐴 to instance 𝐼 in state 𝑆. Instances are
opaque in the semantics, i.e., they are always bound to Clingo
variables, but instances are further structured by the users
(e.g., by specifications in Section 6). Core eFLINT fixes the
attributes A in Definition 2, and prescribes their semantics
in alignment with the corresponding semantics of eFLINT,
as it is described [33, 34] and with missing details drawn
from the Haskell code of the original interpreter.2
Definition 2. (Instance) attributes 𝑎, 𝑎 1, 𝑎 ′, ... : A ≜ A𝑡 ∪
A𝑠 , associated with states (A𝑠 ) and transitions (A𝑡 ). Attributes
are underlined and boldfaced when they occur in antecedents
2We adapt the definitions of CAll, HoldsTrue, is_holds, is_enabled and so

on, from https://gitlab.com/eflint/haskell-implementation/-/blob/cfe73e9a
0ed594e384027ea29529da62dab1fe0f/src/Language/EFLINT/Eval.hs

85

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios

in(create(𝑋 ), 𝑆)
in(add (created (𝑋 )), 𝑆)
∧in(rem(terminated (𝑋 )), 𝑆)

in(created (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
in(holds(𝑋 ), 𝑆)

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

in(obfuscate(𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧¬in(terminate(𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧¬in(create(𝑋 ), 𝑆)

in(terminate(𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧¬in(create(𝑋 ), 𝑆)
in(rem(created (𝑋 )), 𝑆)
∧in(add (terminated (𝑋 )), 𝑆)
in(derived (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧¬in(suppressed (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧¬in(terminated (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
in(holds(𝑋 ), 𝑆)

in(rem(created (𝑋 )), 𝑆)
∧in(rem(terminated (𝑋 )), 𝑆)
in(holds(𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧¬in(suppressed (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
in(enabled (𝑋 ), 𝑆)

in(violated (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧in(enabled (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
in(dutyViol(X ), 𝑆)

in(actTrigger (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
∧¬in(enabled (𝑋 ), 𝑆)
in(actViol(X ), 𝑆)

Figure 4. Clingo rules defining the core eFLINT semantics, clustered to reflect three facets of the language. Above: the effects
of transition attributes in a transition from 𝑆 to 𝑆 + 1 via add and rem. Below: which instances hold and are enabled as a
function of other state-attributes. Right: the state- and transition-level attributes which witness normative violations.
(without violation) to achieve certain effects, e.g., terminating
a desired duty. In eFLINT today, the search for these desirable
actions is externalised, e.g., performed by human users of
the eFLINT interpreter. But in Section 7, we internalise this
kind of scenario-search problem via Clingo rules.
Example 4 demonstrates a hand-crafted Clingo rule set,
defined atop the Core eFLINT semantics, modelling the concrete eFLINT clause Derived from (Foreach dataset: ... ) in Example 1. This demonstrates how Core eFLINT may be used in
its own right. In Section 6 to follow, we define a systematic
translation of eFLINT specifications to Clingo rules in this
manner, ultimately achieving a similar result.

Definition 3. Abstract syntax of eFLINT specifications S (and
types T , clauses C, ...). Attributes A, A𝑡 are from Definition 2.
𝑡, 𝑡 ′, ... : T ≜ {Z, S, ...(more identifiers)}
′

𝑣, 𝑣 , ... : V ≜ T × S

(type ID)
(variable)

𝑔, 𝑔′, ... : G ≜ sum | count | min | max

(aggregator)

𝑒, 𝑒 ′, ... : E := struct (𝑡, 𝑥 : list (E))
| proj(𝑒, 𝑣) | agg(𝑔, 𝑙) | var (𝑣)
| int (𝑥 : Z) | str (𝑥 : S)

(inst. patt.)

′

(instance)

𝑝, 𝑝 , ... : P ⊆ E (just struct, int, str, var)
𝑖, 𝑖 , ... : I ⊆ P (just struct, int, str)

Example 4 (Default Administrator Control as Clingo Rules).

(inst. expr.)

′

′

𝑙, 𝑙 , ... : L := for (𝑝, 𝑎, 𝑙) | let (𝑝, 𝑒, 𝑙)

in (( derived , non_admin_control ( dataset (D ))) , S) :in (( holds , controls (U , dataset ( D ))) , S) ,
not U = user ( " Admin " ) .
in (( derived , controls ( user ( " Admin " ) , dataset (D ))) ,S) :in (( holds ,
dataset (D )) ,S) ,
not in (( holds , non_admin_control ( dataset (D )))) , S) .

| where(𝑙, 𝑏) | 𝑒

(inst. list)

′

𝑏, 𝑏 , ... : B := true | 𝑏 1 ∧ 𝑏 2 | 𝑏 1 ∨ 𝑏 2 | ¬𝑏
| 𝑒 1 < 𝑒 2 | 𝑒 1 = 𝑒 2 | check(𝑎, 𝑒) (bool expr.)
′

𝑐, 𝑐 , ... : C := derive(𝑙) | affect (𝑥 : A𝑡 , 𝑙)
| filter (𝑎, 𝑏) | actType

6

| infinite | finite(𝑥 : list (I))

(clause)

𝑠, 𝑠 , ... : S ≜ map(T , list (V) × set (C))

(spec.)

Specification Translation to Core eFLINT
′

This section defines the eFLINT specification language: its
abstract syntax is a formal language S, and its dynamic
semantics is given by a translation from S to Clingo.
6.1

Definition 4. The instance (list) expression typing function.
type(agg(𝑔, 𝑙)) |

type(int (𝑥)) ≜ Z
type(str (𝑥)) ≜ S

Abstract Syntax

Notation 2 (Common Types and Type-Combinators).
• Z ≜ {..., −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, ...} is the integer type.
• S is the type of string literals like "Well,␣howdy␣do?".
• 𝐴 → 𝐵 is the type of functions from 𝐴 to 𝐵.
• 𝐴 × 𝐵 ≜ {⟨𝑎, 𝑏⟩ | ∀𝑎 :𝐴, 𝑏 : 𝐵} is the product of 𝐴 and 𝐵.
• We use set, map, and list as the usual types of arbitrarily
large but finite collections. For example, [𝑥, 𝑦] is a 2-list.
We coerce map(𝐴, 𝐵) to 𝐴 → 𝐵 ∪ {★}, where ★ ∉ 𝐵
marks each missing mapping, and to or from list (𝐴 × 𝐵),
and we style these pairs ⟨𝑎, 𝑏⟩ suggestively as 𝑎 ↦→ 𝑏.
We coerce set (𝐴) to and from list (𝐴).

type(⟨𝑡, 𝑥⟩ : V) |

type(struct (𝑡, 𝑥)) ≜ 𝑡

type(where(𝑙, 𝑏)) |

type(for (𝑝, 𝑎, 𝑙)) ≜ type(𝑙)
type(proj(𝑒, 𝑣)) ≜ type(𝑣)

Definition 5. Syntactic extensions to B in Definition 3.
exists(𝑝, 𝑏) ≜ int (0) < agg(count,for (enum,𝑝,where(𝑝,𝑏)))
forall(𝑝, 𝑏) ≜ ¬exists(𝑝, ¬𝑏)
Definition 6 (Field Pattern of type 𝑡 in specification 𝑠).
fieldPatt (𝑡, 𝑠) ≜ struct (𝑡, fields) where ⟨fields, 𝑥⟩ ≜ 𝑠 (𝑡)

86

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

C. A. Esterhuyse, T. Müller, and L. T. van Binsbergen

Definition 3 defines an abstract syntax for eFLINT specifications as its own formal language. It adheres closely to that
which was first defined in [34] and then generalised in [33].
Each eFLINT specification 𝑠 : S consists of mappings from
user-defined (record) types 𝑡 : T to type definitions of the
form ⟨𝑉 , 𝐶⟩: respectively, the fields and clauses of 𝑡. This definition enables the construction of 𝑡-type instances, whose
structure is fixed by 𝑉 = [𝑣 1, 𝑣 2, ..., 𝑣𝑛 ]; 𝑡 acts as a constructor
for 𝑡-type instances from smaller instances.
Ultimately, Section 6.4 defines the dynamic semantics of
each specification in terms of its clauses. Intuitively, each
clause of each type 𝑡 is evaluated in the context of a current state 𝑆 to give 𝑡-type instances new attributes in 𝑆. The
clauses themselves fix the attributes, but the instances arise
from the evaluation of instance expressions in E. As a simple
example, derive(struct (instant, [int (9)])) gives instant(9) the
attribute derived. The for construct generalises these expressions to lists of instances, by quantifying over instances with
a given attribute, and binding these to variables in a new
local scope. The where construct filters these lists. For example, for (enabled, 𝑝, where(𝑝, check(dutyViol, 𝑝))) enumerates the current duty violation instances with the type of instance pattern 𝑝. Variables are the simplest patterns, binding
quantified instances in their entirety. Other patterns quantify instances and bind their sub-instances to many variables. For example, if for (struct (controls, [var (⟨agent, "X"⟩,
⟨dataset, "Y"⟩)]), enabled, 𝑙) quantifies enabled controls-type
instances, but binds its controller and dataset to variables
named X and Y, respectively. Like for, let binds instances to
variables via patterns, but without any quantification.
6.2

The static semantics of eFLINT recognises specifications
which only use types and variables as one might expect:
1. variables are bound to instances with matching types,
2. per struct (𝑡, 𝑥), 𝑥 binds (exactly) the fields defined for 𝑡,
3. projections refer only to existing fields of the given instance (not a literal), and 4. accessed variables occur exactly
once in patterns of an enclosing let- or for-expression.
6.3

Restricted Normal Form

In addition to a specification (and scenario) being well-typed,
our translation requires that a specification is in a particular
normal form of a restricted 𝑆 ′ ⊂ 𝑆. The normal form is
characterised by the following properties.
(𝑃1 ) Boolean expressions are in conjunctive normal
form. In other words, there is no {¬, ∨, ∧} inside any ¬𝑒,
and no {∨, ∧} inside any 𝑒 1 ∨ 𝑒 2 . This works around a syntactic limitation of Clingo: antecedents can express 𝑒 1 ∨ 𝑒 2
as 𝑒 1 : not 𝑒 2 , but such terms cannot be nested.
(𝑃2 ) In each for (𝑒, 𝑎, 𝑙) and check(𝑎, 𝑒), 𝑒 is a struct (...).
Ultimately, this ensures that eFLINT’s instance types are preserved in Clingo: each term matching in((A,𝑒 ),S) necessarily
quantifies instances of type(𝑒). Where type(𝑒) is primitive,
the expression is trivial, as primitive instances have no attributes. In the more difficult case, where 𝑒 is some var (𝑣),
we can statically de-structure the variable by replacing it with
fieldPatt (type(𝑣), 𝑠) as defined in Definition 3 (and renaming
the new variables to avoid name collisions, if necessary).
(𝑃3 ) There are no projection expressions (with proj).
Because Clingo has no analogue for projection, we rewrite
any given proj(𝑒, 𝑣). If it is well-typed, type(𝑒) is not primitive, so 𝑒 is either a variable or a structure. In the first case, we
first replace it with fieldPatt (type(𝑣), 𝑠), renaming variables
as needed. In both cases we get proj(struct (𝑡, [𝑒 1, 𝑒 2, 𝑒 3, ...]), 𝑣),
which we rewrite to 𝑒𝑘 , where 𝑣 is the 𝑘 th field of 𝑡.
(𝑃4 ) In each agg(𝑔, 𝑙), term 𝑙 contains no {agg, ∨}. Fortunately, Clingo and eFLINT have corresponding syntax and semantics for aggregators. But unfortunately, only eFLINT permits aggregators to be arbitrarily nested. A nested agg(𝑔, 𝑙)
can be removed via reification: it is replaced by the term
struct (𝑡, ⟨var (𝑣)⟩), where 𝑣 is a fresh variable of the fresh
type 𝑡 defined with fields [Z]; intuitively, 𝑡 collects the elements to be aggregated. In Example 4, non_admin_control reifies
the nested eFLINT expression (Exists user: ...) in Example 1.
(𝑃5 ) Each agg is in the 𝑥 or 𝑏 of a let (𝑝, 𝑒, 𝑙) or where(𝑙, 𝑏).
This works around Clingo’s limitations on aggregations
in consequents. For example, f(X) :- X = #count{g(Y)} is valid
Clingo, but f(#count{g(Y)}) is not. It suffices to replace agg(𝑔, 𝑙)
with let (var (𝑣), agg(𝑔, 𝑙), var (𝑣)) for a fresh 𝑣, which achieves
a similar result; the aggregation becomes an antecedent.

Instance Types and Static Semantics

Only when type 𝑡 has defined fields 𝐹 : list (𝑉 ) can any
instance 𝑖 : I of type 𝑡 be constructed. The fields 𝐹 determine
the structure of 𝑡-type instances. Instances are constructed
with struct and de-constructed (projected to a given field)
with proj, and only when the instances are (de)constructed
with the specified fields; e.g., struct (𝑡, []) is well-typed iff 𝑡
has fields []. We require each types’ fields to be distinctly
identified (i.e., fields are map-like) such that each projection
is unambiguous. Definition 4 defines the (static) typing function, such that evaluating each instance expression 𝑒 : E
yields an instance 𝑖 : I with type(𝑒) = type(𝑖). Example 5
demonstrates by defining all fields in the running example.
The primitive types integers (Z) and strings (S), whose
instances cannot be (de)constructed, are implicitly defined.
Instead, int and str introduce their instances as literals in the
program text. New integers can also emerge dynamically,
from inbuilt operators {+, −, ×, ÷, %}. These operators are
treated as ordinary constants in the abstract syntax, but
their special status is reflected by their infix notation in the
concrete syntax, and by their reduction under evaluation. For
example, users expresss struct (+, int (2), int (3)) concretely
as 2 + 3, which is then reduced to int (5) under evaluation.

6.4

Dynamic Semantics of eFLINT Specifications

The dynamic semantics of a specification 𝑠 is defined as a
translation to state-internal Clingo rules from the clauses 𝐶 ⊆
C associated with each type definition 𝑡 ↦→ ⟨𝑉 , 𝐶⟩ in 𝑠. The

87

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios

translation for a clause 𝑐 ∈ 𝐶 associated with 𝑡 in 𝑠 is defined
by the function J𝑠, 𝑡, 𝑐K given in Definition 7. A complete
translation applies this function to all clauses in a specification (in any order). The result is well-formed if the specification is of the restricted normal form, i.e., satisfies properties 𝑃1, . . . , 𝑃 5 , described previously. The translation benefits
from the declarative nature of Clingo: re-ordering rules or
adding white space does not change their meaning.
J·K from Definition 7 translates the six kinds of clauses, ultimately giving new attributes to (new) instances. The cases
of the JK function definition show how the specialised semantics of these clauses are reconciled. For example, the
translation makes explicit the instances which are implicitly
quantified by affect clauses; each effect arises from some
triggered instance. Ultimately, the translation proceeds by
inductively unfolding syntactic sub-structures; e.g., [] L separates rule-consequents from -antecedents, and [] G maps
eFLINT’s aggregator syntax to the corresponding Clingo.
Much of the complexity of the translation represents a
reconciliation of the semantics of eFLINT and Clingo. For
example, in eFLINT the current state is implicit because it
remains arbitrary, but we make it explicit in our encoding
as the Clingo variable S. Some complexities arise from idiosyncrasies of eFLINT and Clingo. For example, Clingo’s
concrete syntax differs inside and outside of aggregator expressions such as #sum { ... }, e.g., rules separate antecedents
from consequents with :- outside, but with : inside.
Example 6 demonstrates our translation of a simple clause
from the running example Example 1, which was chosen
because it was already in the restricted normal form (see
Section 6.3). As with the Clingo rules in Example 4, these
rules are state-internal, applying to each state S individually,
relying on underlying Core eFLINT and state trace semantics
to relate fluents within and between (resp.) successive states.

Example 5 (specifying fields (not clauses) of Example 1).
For legibility, we use 𝑥 to abbreviate each variable ⟨𝑥, "x"⟩.
[

instant ↦→ ⟨[Z], []⟩,

user ↦→ ⟨[S], []⟩,

dataset ↦→ ⟨[S], []⟩,

elapsed ↦→ ⟨[instant], []⟩,

controls ↦→ ⟨[⟨user, "controller"⟩, dataset], []⟩,
access ↦→ ⟨[user, dataset, instant], []⟩,
must-notify ↦→ ⟨[user, ⟨user, "controller"⟩,
access, ⟨instant, "deadline"⟩], []⟩,
notify ↦→ ⟨[user, ⟨user, "controller"⟩,
must-notify], []⟩,

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

]

Definition 7. J𝑠, 𝑡, 𝑐K is the translation to Clingo of the clause
𝑐 in the definition of type 𝑡 in (restricted) specification 𝑠.
J𝑠, 𝑡, derive(𝑙)K ≜ [𝑙, derived] L .

J𝑠, 𝑡, affect (𝑙, 𝑎)K ≜ [for (𝑝, trigger, 𝑙), 𝑎] L .

J𝑠, 𝑡, filter (𝑏, 𝑎)K ≜ [for (𝑝, enum, where(𝑝, 𝑏)), 𝑎] L .
J𝑠, 𝑡, actTypeK ≜ [for (𝑝, trigger, 𝑝), actTrigger] .
J𝑠, 𝑡, infiniteK ≜ [for (𝑝, holds, 𝑝), enum] .

J𝑠, 𝑡, finite( [𝑖 1, 𝑖 2, ...])K ≜ [𝑖 1, enum] L . [𝑖 2, enum] L . ...

where 𝑝 ≜ fieldPatt (𝑡, 𝑠)
–––––––––––––––––––––– – – –

[for (𝑝, 𝑎 ′, 𝑙), 𝑎] L ≜ [where(𝑙, check(𝑎 ′, 𝑝)), 𝑎] L
[where(𝑙, 𝑏), 𝑎] L ≜ [𝑙, 𝑎] L ; [𝑏] B
[let (𝑝, 𝑒, 𝑙), 𝑎] L ≜ [𝑙, 𝑎] L ; [𝑝] E = [𝑒] E
[𝑒, 𝑎] L ≜ in(( [𝑎] A , [𝑒] E ),S) :- state(S)
[true] B ≜ #true
[check(𝑎, 𝑒)] B ≜ in(( [𝑎] A , [𝑒] E ),S)
[𝑏 1 ∧ 𝑏 2 ] B ≜ [𝑏 1 ] B ; [𝑏 2 ] B

B
𝑏 if ∃𝑏, ¬¬𝑏 = ¬𝑏 2
[𝑏 1 ∨ 𝑏 2 ] B ≜ [𝑏 1 ] B :
¬𝑏 2 otherwise

Example 6. (translating Violated when Holds(elapsed(deadline))).
J𝑠, must_notify, filter (𝑏, violated)K

where 𝑏 ≜ holds(struct (elapsed, [⟨instant, "deadline"⟩]))

[¬𝑏] B ≜ not [𝑏] B

⇒
= [for (𝑝, enum, where(𝑝, 𝑏)), violated] L

[𝑒 1 < 𝑒 2 ] B ≜ [𝑒 1 ] E < [𝑒 2 ] E

where 𝑝 ≜ fieldPatt (must_notify, 𝑠)

[𝑒 1 = 𝑒 2 ] B ≜ [𝑒 1 ] E = [𝑒 2 ] E

⇒
= [where(where(𝑝, 𝑏), check(enum, 𝑝)), violated] L

[struct (𝑡,[𝑒 1, 𝑒 2, 𝑒 3, ..., 𝑒𝑛 ])] E

⇒
= [where(𝑝, 𝑏)), violated] L ; [check(enum, 𝑝)] B

≜ 𝑡 ( [𝑒 1 ] E , [𝑒 2 ] E , [𝑒 3 ] E , ... [𝑒𝑛 ] E )

⇒
= [𝑝, violated] L ; in(holds( [𝑏] B ),S) ; in(enum( [𝑝] E ),S)

[agg(𝑔, 𝑙)] E ≜ [𝑔] G { 𝑟 ( [𝑙, enum] L ) }
where 𝑟 replaces each ; with , and :- with :

⇒
=

E

[r (𝑥)] ≜ 𝑥 for 𝑟 ∈ {var, int, str}
G

[] : G → S ≜ {count ↦→ #count, sum ↦→ #sum, ...}

⇒
=

[] A : A → S ≜ {trigger ↦→ trigger, create ↦→ create, ...}
⇒
=

88

[𝑝, violated] L ;
in(holds(elapsed(D)),S) ; in(enum(must_notify(U,C,A,D)),S).

E
in(violated( [𝑝] ),S) :- state(S) ;
in(holds(elapsed(D)),S) ; in(enum(must_notify(U,C,A,D)),S).
in(violated(must_notify(U,C,A,D)),S) :- state(S) ;
in(holds(elapsed(D)),S) ; in(enum(must_notify(U,C,A,D)),S).

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

C. A. Esterhuyse, T. Müller, and L. T. van Binsbergen

Our Generalisations. Our version of eFLINT specifications generalises the original language in three ways. Firstly,
our let binders are new. Secondly, we generalise binders
in for (and let) from variables to patterns. Thirdly, our for
quantifies over instances with any attribute and not just the
enumerables (with enum). In principle, these generalisations
enable new usages, but we only use them within the translation for the clause-transformations described in Section 6.3,
so our experiments use none of these generalisations. But
Section 9 discusses our interest in exploring eFLINT variants.

7

scenario actions, e.g., via Clingo’s disjuctive-head rules, and
2. the satisfaction criterion, e.g., via Clingo’s constraint rules.
The search problems expressible via these rules enjoy the
same freedoms and limitations as expressing search problems
with Clingo in general. For example, the search space and
search criterion do not need to be state-internal.
Example 8 shows the Clingo encoding of a search-problem
that is of particular interest to eFLINT users and the normative domain in general. Precisely, Example 8 model-checks
the specification against the proposition ‘taking only enabled
actions violates no duties’, captured by the final rule in the
negative, such that stable models encode counterexamples.
Each solution details the offending counterexample scenario.

Scenario Translation to Core eFLINT.

Finally, this section translates eFLINT scenarios to Clingo.
We distinguish the two scenario representations, reflecting
the two use cases of our new interpreter. In either case, we
assume we are given an eFLINT specification, which has
already been translated into Clingo via J·K from Definition 7.
7.1

Example 8 (Find Act-Compliant, Non-Compliant Scenarios).
1 = { choose (I ,S ) : triggerable (I , S) } :- state (S).
in (( trigger , I) , S) :- choose (I ,S ).
:- 0 = { in (( dutyViol , I) , S) } .

– – – – – – – – the case-specific part – – – – – – – –

{ state ( S) } :- S = 1..1000.
triggerable (X , S) :- in (( enabled , X) , S ) ; state (S + 1 ) ;
X = ( access (U ,D ,I ) ; notify (U ,C ,M) ) .
in (( create , controls ( user ( " Amy " ) , dataset ( " X-Rays " ))) , 1) .
in (( create , controls ( user ( " Bob " ) , dataset ( " Biopsy " ))) , 1) .
in (( create , controls ( user ( " Dan " ) , dataset ( " Weight " ))) , 1) .

Use Case: Check if a Scenario is Compliant

The first use case is scenario-compliance (demonstrated in
Example 1) in which the interpreter checks the compliance
of a given scenario. Precisely, each scenario is in list (A𝑡 × I ).
Intuitively, each scenario labels each 13th transition with an
effect: assigning a transition-attribute to a given instance.
Example 7 shows the running example scenario before and
after translation. Note that the translation is straightforward,
and the resulting rules are state-internal.

The case-specifics define the search space: its depth is
limited to 1000 states, and its breadth is defined by the triggerable (access- or notify action type) instances, which result
from the initially created control-instances. This input yields
no stable model; the property holds! But the scenario is not interesting because no (triggerable) actions advance the elapsed
time. Adding rule in((create,elapsed(S)),S) :- state(S) conflates
the passage of states with the passage of time; consequently,
counter-examples arise, e.g., where Dan accesses the X-Rays,
but violates the duty to inform Amy at instant 11.

Example 7 (scenario translated from eFLINT to Clingo).
Abstract eFLINT
⟨create, dataset ( "X-Rays" ) ⟩
⟨create, controls (user ( "Amy" ),
dataset ( "X-Rays" ) ) ⟩
⟨create, user ( "Bob" ) ⟩
⟨create, instant (9) ⟩
⟨trigger, access (user ( "Bob" ),
dataset ( "X-Rays" ), 9) ⟩

Clingo term
in(create(dataset("X-Rays")),1)
in(create(controls(user("Amy"),
dataset("X-Rays"))),2)
in(create(user("Bob")),3)
in(create(instant(9)),4)
in(trigger(access(user("Bob"),
dataset("X-Rays"),9)),5)

8

In the dynamic semantics of a scenario, a concrete ‘current state’ is modified to its successor state in between the
elements of a scenario. Recall that the dynamic semantics
of a specification (Section 6) refers to an abstract current
state S and assigns attributes to instances in S. The rules generated from an eFLINT specification, alongside the rules of
Core eFLINT (Section 5) and state traces (Section 4), thus
produces attribute-assignments for all concrete states generated by the scenario according to the clauses of the specification. It is precisely these attribute-assignments that are
interesting output to the eFLINT user. For example, the output (e.g., of Example 1) contains created or terminated facts,
triggered actions/events (possibly as the result of a triggered
action/event), and violations of actions and duties.
7.2

Correctness Evaluation

We characterise the correctness of our new eFLINT semantics
as matching input/output behaviours of the two implementations, where expected. Our artefact includes our source
code, experimental data, experimental scripts, and a utility
tool for comparing output behaviours.
Evaluation Scope. We focus on the existing use case of
checking given scenarios (see Section 7.1), because our search
for scenarios is incomparable to in the existing interpreter.
For the sake of space, we do not discuss the performance evaluation included in our artefact. Section 9 discusses planned
future evaluations, e.g., by comparing our scenario-search
to other languages’ model-checkers.
Test Suite. Our tests are a suite of specification-scenario
pairs chosen to tease out the possible interactions between
instances, states, and attributes. Our tests were chosen based
on our understanding of eFLINT, but also, inspired by the
exhaustive unit tests in the existing eFLINT interpreter’s
repository. For example, one test simultaneously creates and

Use Case: Search for Satisfactory Scenarios

In this novel usage, the user encodes a scenario-search problem: Clingo rules which define 1. the search space of possible

89

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

Example 10 (No Stable Model). Given the following input,
our interpreter gives no stable model, which is distinct from
one empty stable model. The existing interpreter lets p("") hold.

terminates an instance, while another spreads these over
successive states. The suite also includes the running example, and the Algemene Afsprakenstelsel 3 , a formalisation
on the data sharing agreement of the Dutch Metropolitan
Innovations Ecosystem consortium, which is (to our knowledge) the most complex and realistic eFLINT specification
at time of writing. All tests, on 108 pairs of scenarios and
(43) specifications, are reproducible via our artefact [19]. To
follow, we explain the results via a few illustrative test cases.

Fact p Identified by String
Derived from p ( " " ) Where Not ( Holds ( p ( " " )))

Example 11 (Several Stable Models). Given the following
input, our interpreter gives two stable models: in one, f(0) holds
but f(1) does not, and vice versa in the other. The existing
interpreter agrees with just the second stable model.
Fact f Identified by Int
Derived from f (0) Where Not ( Holds ( f (1)))
Derived from f (1) Where Not ( Holds ( f (0)))

Evaluation Results. The old and new implementations
disagree only in cases of reasoning by default, where conclusions are conditioned on the implicit or explicit absence
of fluents, namely, the evaluation of where(𝑙, check(...)) and
agg(...), change when fluents are removed. The Not(Exists...)
expression in Example 1 is such a case. From the user perspective, the existing interpreter can ‘overlook’ conditions of
this form. This emerges from the reasoning algorithm it implements; in summary, it interleavedly evaluates expressions
and adds to the collection of fluents, but it does not keep
track of which absent fluents were checked; later additions
can overturn prior checks, so the order of clause-evaluation
(which is sensitive to type and variable naming) matters.
Example 9 demonstrates with small specifications.

Ultimately, we observe that the two interpreters produce
equivalent results, except where they differ as expected,
where only the new interpreter reasons by default. We conclude that we have correctly redefined and reimplemented
eFLINT, but we continue to expand our test suite.

9

Related & Future Work

Further Testing and Benchmarking. Work continues
to expand our test suite. We intend to cover the entirely of
the original eFLINT examples, and to benchmark the new
interpreter’s performance to that of the old interpreter. Much
of this performance evaluation has already been done and
can be found in the artefact [19], but we have left it out
of scope. So far, we find that the new interpreter dramatically outperforms the original in most cases (reaching 25×
speedup in one long and complex scenario), but their performance is comparable in trivial cases, or in cases when
Clingo’s optimisations fail, e.g., in guessing prime numbers.

Example 9 (Where the Two eFLINT Semantics Disagree).
For the following two specifications, both versions of the eFLINT
interpreter agree that only y("") holds. Indeed, these specifications have the same stable model, constructed by applying the
second derivation clause, after which the first clause is not
applicable. Here, we omit Identified by String for each type.
Fact x Derived from x ( " " ) Where Not ( Holds ( y ( " " )))
Fact y Derived from y ( " " )

Different Ways to Define eFLINT. The impetus for our
work was the observation that, in abstracto, eFLINT specifications resemble logic programs. Thus, we give eFLINT
a semantics via a translation to logic programs. But we acknowledge that other approaches are available also. For example, [1] formalises another language which is also normative and used for case analysis and model-checking. But
their formalism is based on first-order linear temporal logic.
Consequently, their work is more self-contained; e.g., readers
of [1] are not burdened with the idiosyncrasies of Clingo.
But our approach has the benefit of leveraging the existing Clingo interpreter. If the trade-off changes in the future,
newer semantics can always be defined and related to this
one, e.g., as was done extensively for the Reo language [14].

–––––––––––––––––––––– – – –

Fact z Derived from z ( " " ) Where Not ( Exists y: True )
Fact y Derived from y ( " " )

Our new interpreter reaches the same result given the following, third version of the specification. But the order in which
the existing interpreter evaluates the clauses is unexpectedly
disturbed, changing its result. It lets x("") hold, ‘forgets’ the
prior condition on y(""), and finally lets y("") also hold.
Fact x Derived from x ( " " ) Where Not ( Exists y: True )
Fact y Derived from y ( " " )

For the same reason, the interpreters’ behaviours diverge
then the input has no unique stable model. Examples 10
and 11 demonstrate. In either case, users of our new interpreter are better informed. In Example 10, its output makes
the unsatisfiability of the specification explicit, rather than
silently violating the logical formula encoded in the derivation clause. In Example 11, its output recognises logical ‘nondeterminism’, enumerating the consistent interpretations of
the specification, rather than arbitrarily picking one.

eFLINT Simplifications & Variants. Our translation
faithfully captures semantic facets of eFLINT in attributes.
However, some facets could be captured in user-defined instances and types instead. For example, if termination is
removed, users can model the termination of 𝑖 by creating
𝑖 ′ if 𝑖 ′ suppresses 𝑖. And if each finite( [i1, i2 , ..., in ]) clause is
approximated by 𝑛 by derive clauses, emit can be removed,
because its instances coincide with those that hold. Thus, simpler specifications become easier to model and reason about.

3 The document is available at https://dmi-ecosysteem.nl/wp-content/uplo

ads/bb_documents/2023/10/2023.06.01-DMI-Afsprakenstelsel-v1.pdf, our
formalisation process is documented at https://definities.dmi-ecosysteem.nl,
and both are alongside our eFLINT formalisation in our artefact [19].

90

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

C. A. Esterhuyse, T. Müller, and L. T. van Binsbergen

Evaluating Scenario Search. We have left the evaluation of our interpreter’s scenario-searching out of scope. In
future, we want to more precisely characterise what expressive power this brings to users, and how it compares to tools
for other languages such as Symboleo [25] and Fievel [36].

We also intend to experiment with Core eFLINT. Which semantic changes are desirable? Can we create a common core
for eFLINT and related languages such as DPCL [31]?
Circumstantial Substitutes for Clingo. In this work,
we prioritised the cohesion in our semantics accross the
two use-cases of eFLINT. But in the simpler use case of
scenario-checking, we make little use of Clingo’s more powerful features. In the future, we are interested in specialising
the translation pipeline to target languages more suited to
this specialised task. For example, we consider instead targeting the Datalog-based Soufflé language [15]. Unlike Clingo,
Soufflé has eFLINT-like record types and type checking. Can
we translate between these notions of type? Does this result
in more efficient reasoning and more explainable output?

10

Conclusion

In this work, we re-defined the eFLINT normative specification language via a translation to Clingo answer-set solving.
We defined a new eFLINT semantics and interpreter.
Our semantics is desirable for its rigour. Notably, we have
formalised a notion expressed in the original article [34]:
eFLINT clauses express logical inference rules. In the process,
we have identified and corrected a flaw in the existing eFLINT
interpreter concerning inference about conditions by default,
which is well-studied in the logic programming community.
Our interpreter reasons by default correctly.
In fact, our interpreter consists almost entirely of the
Clingo solver; by translating eFLINT to Clingo, we let Clingo
perform our normative case analysis. This approach minimises the gap between the semantics and the interpreter.
Moreover, it afforded the generalisation of eFLINT’s typical
scenario case analysis to scenario search. Via Clingo, our
tool can recommend scenarios and model-check scenarios
against properties in general, and specification-compliance
in particular. These use cases were supported in languages
related to eFLINT, but not yet in eFLINT itself.
In the future, we want to continue improving and evaluating our new interpreter, for example, by drawing from
ruleset preprocessing from the answer-set solving community. We are also interested in investigating the intermediate
languages we have identified between eFLINT and Clingo.
Our Core eFLINT language is promising: its embedding in
Clingo makes it inter-operable with any Clingo rules, and it
includes much of the eFLINT semantics, but it more abstract
and simple. In the future, we want to investigate these kinds
of minimal normative languages as new translation targets
for various purposes, and for their suitability – in their own
right – to the use cases of eFLINT: normative specification,
automated case analysis, and normative model-checking.

Logical Theories of Dynamic Systems. Like the original eFLINT article [34], in Section 4, our semantics draws
from work on the event-, situation-, and fluent-calculi. Other
works (e.g., [27]) thoroughly overview and compare these
formalisms. Here, it suffices to acknowledge that our notions
of state and action were originally inspired by the event
calculus [29], but in our simple case of linear traces, many
features of the other calculi emerge also. Like situations, our
scenarios list actions in the order they happen [17, 18].
Many-Valued Logics. Prior works have generalised the
usual Boolean value domain of logical variables [3, 21, 22].
For example, [21] distinguishes essential from accidental
truth, and distinguishes their semantics under combination
with ∧, ¬, and so on, to capture ‘natural language reasoning’. Regardless, the system can be reasoned about; e.g., [20]
axiomatises a first-order fragment of the system, and proves
its completeness. Similarly, we distinguish attributes of the
same instances to encode many truth values, and our semantic rules define how they interact. Also similarly, we
prescribe distinct (modal) interpretations of different values;
e.g., actViol truths are undesirable, because they represent
actions taken without permission. We also model a threevalued logic in Core eFLINT in (interactions between) create,
terminate, and obfuscate, to encode priority.
Constraint- vs. Logic Programming. An experimental
eFLINT model-checking backend was developed in 2022 [7],
inspired by the approach of Symboleo: targeting the nuXmv
SMT solver to model-check scenarios. This work inspired
our own, but we opted to target Clingo instead of nuXmv,
because its stable model semantics aligns more closely with
what was originally described for eFLINT. It concerns the
distinction between logic- and constraint-programming: only
the former requires that truths be supported by concrete
inference steps, i.e., each truth in the model is the root of a
proof tree. In practice, truth is more explainable; e.g., nuXmv
but not Clingo lets x be true in the trivial specification; Clingo
cannot support this truth, as it is the consequence of no rule.

Acknowledgements
This research was partly funded by the AMdEX-fieldlab
project (Kansen Voor West EFRO grant KVW00309) and
the AMdEX-DMI project (Dutch Metropolitan Innovations
ecosystem for smart and sustainable cities, made possible by
the Nationaal Groeifonds).
Data Availability Statement. Our artefact [19] includes
the source code of our implementation, and the data and
scripts necessary to (re)produce our evaluation in Section 8.

91

A Stable Model Semantics for eFLINT Norm Specifications and Model Checking Scenarios

References

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

- 28th International Conference, CAV 2016, Toronto, ON, Canada, July
17-23, 2016, Proceedings, Part II (Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 9780), Swarat Chaudhuri and Azadeh Farzan (Eds.). Springer, 422–
430. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-41540-6_23
[16] Lu-Chi Liu, Giovanni Sileno, and Tom M. van Engers. 2020. Digital
Enforceable Contracts (DEC): Making Smart Contracts Smarter. In
Legal Knowledge and Information Systems - JURIX 2020: The Thirtythird Annual Conference, Brno, Czech Republic, December 9-11, 2020
(Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, Vol. 334), Serena
Villata, Jakub Harasta, and Petr Kremen (Eds.). IOS Press, 235–238.
doi:10.3233/FAIA200872
[17] John McCarthy. 1963. Situations, actions, and causal laws.
[18] John McCarthy. 2002. Actions and other events in situation calculus.
In Kr. 615–628.
[19] Tim Müller, Christopher A. Esterhuyse, and L. Thomas van Binsbergen.
2025. Source Code and Experimental Data for a Translatfrom eFLINT
Normative Specifications to Clingo Answer-Set Programs. doi:10.528
1/zenodo.15188960 This URL and DOI refer to the most recent version
of our artefact, from where the URL and DOI of each (fixed) version is
accessible. Version1 has DOI 10.5281/zenodo.15188959, and version2
has DOI 10.5281/zenodo.15470286. The latter is the most recent at time
of writing and accompanies this article.
[20] Grigory K. Olkhovikov. 2016. A Complete, Correct, and Independent
Axiomatization of the First-Order Fragment of a Three-Valued Paraconsistent Logic. FLAP 3, 3 (2016), 335–340. http://www.collegepubli
cations.co.uk/downloads/ifcolog00007.pdf
[21] Grigory K. Olkhovikov. 2016. On a New Three-Valued Paraconsistent
Logic. FLAP 3, 3 (2016), 317–334. http://www.collegepublications.co
.uk/downloads/ifcolog00007.pdf
[22] Mauricio Osorio and Claudia Zepeda. 2019. Three New Genuine Fivevalued Logics Intended to Model Non-trivial Concepts. In Selected
Papers of the Eleventh and Twelfth Latin American Workshop on Logic/Languages, Algorithms and New Methods of Reasoning, LANMR 2018,
Puebla, Mexico, November 15, 2018 & LANMR 2019, Puebla, Mexico,
November 15, 2019 (Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science,
Vol. 354), Pilar Pozos Parra and José Raymundo Marcial-Romero (Eds.).
Elsevier, 157–170. doi:10.1016/J.ENTCS.2020.10.012
[23] André Pacak. 2024. Datalog as a (non-logic) Programming Language.
Ph. D. Dissertation. University of Mainz, Germany. https://openscie
nce.ub.uni-mainz.de/handle/20.500.12030/10930
[24] Mostafa Mohajeri Parizi, L. Thomas van Binsbergen, Giovanni Sileno,
and Tom van Engers. 2022. A Modular Architecture for Integrating Normative Advisors in MAS. In Multi-Agent Systems, Dorothea
Baumeister and Jörg Rothe (Eds.). Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 312–329.
[25] Alireza Parvizimosaed, Marco Roveri, Aidin Rasti, Daniel Amyot, Luigi
Logrippo, and John Mylopoulos. 2022. Model-checking legal contracts
with SymboleoPC. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on
Model Driven Engineering Languages and Systems (Montreal, Quebec,
Canada) (MODELS ’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 278–288. doi:10.1145/3550355.3552449
[26] Alireza Parvizimosaed, Sepehr Sharifi, Daniel Amyot, Luigi Logrippo,
Marco Roveri, Aidin Rasti, Ali Roudak, and John Mylopoulos. 2022.
Specification and analysis of legal contracts with Symboleo. Software
and Systems Modeling 21, 6 (2022), 2395–2427.
[27] Stephan Schiffel and Michael Thielscher. 2006. Reconciling Situation Calculus and Fluent Calculus. In Proceedings, The Twenty-First
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence and the Eighteenth Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference, July 1620, 2006, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. AAAI Press, 287–292. http:
//www.aaai.org/Library/AAAI/2006/aaai06-046.php
[28] Danny De Schreye and Stefaan Decorte. 1994. Termination of Logic
Programs: The Never-Ending Story. J. Log. Program. 19/20 (1994),
199–260. doi:10.1016/0743-1066(94)90027-2

[1] Huib Aldewereld, Javier Vázquez-Salceda, Frank Dignum, and JohnJules Ch. Meyer. 2005. Verifying Norm Compliancy of Protocols. In
Coordination, Organizations, Institutions, and Norms in Multi-Agent
Systems, AAMAS 2005 International Workshops on Agents, Norms
and Institutions for Regulated Multi-Agent Systems, ANIREM 2005,
and Organizations in Multi-Agent Systems, OOOP 2005, Utrecht, The
Netherlands, July 25-26, 2005, Revised Selected Papers (Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Vol. 3913), Olivier Boissier, Julian A. Padget, Virginia Dignum, Gabriela Lindemann, Eric T. Matson, Sascha Ossowski,
Jaime Simão Sichman, and Javier Vázquez-Salceda (Eds.). Springer,
231–245. doi:10.1007/11775331_16
[2] Jamila Alsayed Kassem, Corinne Allaart, Saba Amiri, Milen Kebede,
Tim Müller, Rosanne Turner, Adam Belloum, L. Thomas van Binsbergen, Peter Grunwald, Aart van Halteren, Paola Grosso, Cees de
Laat, and Sander Klous. 2024. Building a Digital Health Twin for
Personalized Intervention: The EPI Project. In Commit2Data (Open
Access Series in Informatics (OASIcs), Vol. 124), Boudewijn R. Haverkort,
Aldert de Jongste, Pieter van Kuilenburg, and Ruben D. Vromans (Eds.).
Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2:1–2:18. doi:10.4230/OASIcs.Commit2Data.2
[3] João Barbosa, Mário Florido, and Vítor Santos Costa. 2019. A ThreeValued Semantics for Typed Logic Programming. In Proceedings 35th
International Conference on Logic Programming (Technical Communications), ICLP 2019 Technical Communications, Las Cruces, NM, USA,
September 20-25, 2019 (EPTCS, Vol. 306), Bart Bogaerts, Esra Erdem,
Paul Fodor, Andrea Formisano, Giovambattista Ianni, Daniela Inclezan,
Germán Vidal, Alicia Villanueva, Marina De Vos, and Fangkai Yang
(Eds.). 36–51. doi:10.4204/EPTCS.306.10
Hohfeldian normative systems.
[4] Pierfrancesco Biasetti. 2015.
Philosophia 43 (2015), 951–959.
[5] Francesco Calimeri, Martin Gebser, Marco Maratea, and Francesco
Ricca. 2016. Design and results of the Fifth Answer Set Programming
Competition. Artif. Intell. 231 (2016), 151–181. doi:10.1016/J.ARTINT.2
015.09.008
[6] Stefano Ceri, Georg Gottlob, and Letizia Tanca. 1989. What you Always
Wanted to Know About Datalog (And Never Dared to Ask). IEEE Trans.
Knowl. Data Eng. 1, 1 (1989), 146–166. doi:10.1109/69.43410
[7] Florine de Geus. 2022. Model Checking Normative Systems. University
of Amsterdam (2022).
[8] Luís Duarte d’Almeida. 2016. Fundamental legal concepts: the Hohfeldian framework. Philosophy Compass 11, 10 (2016), 554–569.
[9] Christopher A Esterhuyse and L Thomas van Binsbergen. 2024. Cooperative Specification via Composition Control. In Proceedings of the
17th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Software Language
Engineering. 2–15.
[10] European Commission. 2016. Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal
data and on the free movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (Text with EEA
relevance). https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj
[11] Martin Gebser, Roland Kaminski, Benjamin Kaufmann, and Torsten
Schaub. 2019. Multi-shot ASP solving with clingo. Theory Pract. Log.
Program. 19, 1 (2019), 27–82. doi:10.1017/S1471068418000054
[12] Martin Gebser, Roland Kaminski, Benjamin Kaufmann, and Torsten
Schaub. 2022. Answer set solving in practice. Springer Nature.
[13] Michael Gelfond and Vladimir Lifschitz. 1988. The stable model semantics for logic programming.. In ICLP/SLP, Vol. 88. Cambridge, MA,
1070–1080.
[14] Sung-Shik TQ Jongmans and Farhad Arbab. 2012. Overview of Thirty
Semantic Formalisms for Reo. Scientific Annals of Computer Science
22, 1 (2012).
[15] Herbert Jordan, Bernhard Scholz, and Pavle Subotic. 2016. Soufflé:
On Synthesis of Program Analyzers. In Computer Aided Verification

92

GPCE ’25, July 3–4, 2025, Bergen, Norway

C. A. Esterhuyse, T. Müller, and L. T. van Binsbergen

[29] Murray Shanahan. 2001. The event calculus explained. In Artificial
intelligence today: Recent trends and developments. Springer, 409–430.
[30] Sepehr Sharifi, Alireza Parvizimosaed, Daniel Amyot, Luigi Logrippo,
and John Mylopoulos. 2020. Symboleo: Towards a specification language for legal contracts. In 2020 IEEE 28th international requirements
engineering conference (RE). IEEE, 364–369.
[31] Giovanni Sileno, Thomas van Binsbergen, Matteo Pascucci, and Tom
van Engers. 2022. DPCL: a language template for normative specifications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.04477 (2022). doi:10.48550/arXiv.2201.
04477 Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.04477..
[32] Jorrit Stutterheim, Aleandro Mifsud, and Ana Oprescu. 2024. DYNAMOS: Dynamic Microservice Composition for Data-Exchange Systems, Lessons Learned. In 2024 IEEE 21st International Conference on
Software Architecture Companion (ICSA-C). 8–15. doi:10.1109/ICSAC63560.2024.00008
[33] L. Thomas van Binsbergen, Milen G. Kebede, Joshua Baugh, Tom M.
van Engers, and Dannis G. van Vuurden. 2021. Dynamic generation
of access control policies from social policies. In The 12th International Conference on Emerging Ubiquitous Systems and Pervasive Networks (EUSPN 2021) / The 11th International Conference on Current
and Future Trends of Information and Communication Technologies
in Healthcare (ICTH-2021), Leuven, Belgium, November 1-4, 2021 (Procedia Computer Science, Vol. 198), Nuno Varandas, Ansar-Ul-Haque
Yasar, Haroon Malik, and Stéphane Galland (Eds.). Elsevier, 140–147.

doi:10.1016/J.PROCS.2021.12.221
[34] L. Thomas van Binsbergen, Lu-Chi Liu, Robert van Doesburg, and
Tom M. van Engers. 2020. eFLINT: a domain-specific language for
executable norm specifications. In GPCE ’20: Proceedings of the 19th
ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Generative Programming:
Concepts and Experiences, Virtual Event, USA, November 16-17, 2020,
Martin Erwig and Jeff Gray (Eds.). ACM, 124–136. doi:10.1145/342589
8.3426958
[35] L. Thomas van Binsbergen, Merrick Oost-Rosengren, Hayo Schreijer,
Freek Dijkstra, and Taco van Dijk. 2024. AMdEX Reference Architecture
– version 1.0.0. doi:10.5281/zenodo.10565915
[36] Francesco Viganò and Marco Colombetti. 2008. Model Checking
Norms and Sanctions in Institutions. In Coordination, Organizations,
Institutions, and Norms in Agent Systems III, Jaime Simão Sichman,
Julian Padget, Sascha Ossowski, and Pablo Noriega (Eds.). Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 316–329.
[37] Tomasz Zurek, Mostafa Mohajeriparizi, Jonathan Kwik, and Tom M.
van Engers. 2022. Can a Military Autonomous Device Follow International Humanitarian Law?. In Legal Knowledge and Information Systems
- JURIX 2022: The Thirty-fifth Annual Conference, Saarbrücken, Germany,
14-16 December 2022 (Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Applications, Vol. 362), Enrico Francesconi, Georg Borges, and Christoph Sorge
(Eds.). IOS Press, 273–278. doi:10.3233/FAIA220479

93

