Circular
Appendix – Non-exhaustive list of risk factors in relation to the use of
generative AI language models
The use of AI LMs involves various risks. Whilst multiple functionalities or risk mitigation
measures can be adopted to enhance the utility, performance or safety of an AI LM, LCs
should beware of potential limitations to their effectiveness. The non-exhaustive list of risk
factors set out below should be read in conjunction with Core Principles 1 – 4 in the circular.
Core Principle 1: Senior management responsibilities
Over-reliance
1.

Researchers have found that whilst AI LMs can provide large productivity benefits,
when some management consultants use AI LMs on complex tasks outside the AI’s
capabilities, a higher percentage of workers provide inaccurate recommendations
than workers in the same organisation without AI support.

Agentic AI
2.

A recent development is the integration of AI LMs into agentic AI workflows, where an
AI LM is augmented with or incorporated into software programmes having the ability
to make step-by-step plans and take sequences of actions (including using external
tools) to pursue specific goals and accomplish a variety of multi-step digital tasks with
limited direct human supervision. While such deployment is not always high-risk if
properly designed and implemented, agentic AI currently presents significant
governance challenges 1, for example, in striking the right balance between autonomy
and control. LCs should therefore exercise extra caution when assessing the use of
agentic AI LMs.

Core Principle 2: AI model risk management
3.

When validating AI LMs, monitoring and testing their performance, LCs should
beware of the following issues:
a.

There may be multiple causes of hallucination. One possible reason is related
to the inherent nature of the underlying AI LMs and how these are trained to
generate outputs based on probabilities. Developed as general-purpose
models to perform a variety of tasks, they are not necessarily designed with
the primary purpose to generate factually accurate output. Another possible
contributor to hallucination is noise in the training data such as inconsistent
statements or ambiguous context.

b.

When assessing data quality, LCs should beware that biases may arise
during:
i.

1

the data collection process when choosing what data to include (selection
bias). Additionally, biases may arise from the way that questions are
framed, ie, asking questions phrased in a certain way or sequence may
elicit biased answers from respondents; and

See for example Open AI, Practices for Governing Agentic AI Systems.

54/F, One Island East, 18 Westlands Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong
香港鰂魚涌華蘭路 18 號港島東中心 54 樓
+852 2231 1222

www.sfc.hk

Page 1 of 4

ii. the data cleansing and data processing stages when labelling the data,
addressing gaps in the data or attempting to improve the signal to noise
ratio within the data.
c.

It has been shown that word embeddings in natural language processing can
pick up racial and gender biases, and some debiasing techniques may mask
and not completely remove biases in word embeddings. Biases embedded in
the model may be more difficult to identify, and therefore extra care may be
necessary when deploying AI LMs as components for classification.

d.

As AI LMs may generate unsubstantiated output concerning other entities,
LCs should beware of the reputational and legal risks associated with AI LMs
outputting adverse comments about competitors.

e.

Any apparent commitment made to users which is generated by an LC’s
public facing AI LM may expose the LC to legal risk even if the content is
fabricated 2.

f.

Hallucination in some solutions marketed as “eliminating” or “avoiding”
hallucination is found to remain wide-ranging. LCs choosing to deploy such
solutions should therefore critically review their efficacy.

g.

Model drift has been observed in the performance of commercially available
AI LMs in relation to, for example, mathematical questions. Even the same
version of some commercially available AI LMs exhibited model drift.

h.

AI LMs exhibit cognitive biases which are observed in human decision
making, such as the framing effect (where people make a choice based on
whether the options are presented with positive or negative connotations) and
status quo bias (where an option presented as the status quo is more likely to
be selected).

i.

Even when AI LMs have been designed to be harmless and honest,
misaligned behaviour such as AI deception has also been identified.

Prompt engineering and content filtering
4.

Prompt engineering may reduce hallucination and cybersecurity risks by using
system prompts to provide the AI LM with instructions on how to behave and respond
to user enquiries, such as defining the types of questions it is allowed to answer and
preventing it from replying to a question when it does not have the information to do
so. However, users may still need to (a) test end-to-end performance after any
prompt engineering to ensure desired behaviour, and (b) validate the model
responses 3 as the response generated may still contradict the intent of the instruction
in the system prompt 4.

5.

Furthermore, instruction drift has been noted, ie, system prompts may not be
stable over multiple turns of dialogue. As such, guardrails implemented through
system prompts may degrade over the course of user interaction.

2

In Moffatt v. Air Canada, the British Columbia Civil Resolution Tribunal found Air Canada liable for misinformation given to
a consumer by an AI LM on its website.
3
As Microsoft has reminded users, it is important that even when using prompt engineering effectively, users still need to
validate the responses the models generate. Just because a carefully crafted prompt worked well for a particular scenario does
not necessarily mean it will generalise more broadly to certain use cases.
4
Microsoft has reminded users, even if users instruct a model in the system message to answer “I don't know” when unsure of
an answer, this does not guarantee that the request will be honoured.
54/F, One Island East, 18 Westlands Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong
香港鰂魚涌華蘭路 18 號港島東中心 54 樓
+852 2231 1222

www.sfc.hk

Page 2 of 4

6.

Whilst inputting high-quality, unambiguous user prompts may help reduce
hallucination risk, LCs should beware that some AI LMs may exhibit recency bias,
where the order or position of the information supplied within the user prompt affects
model performance.

7.

Content filtering may also enhance model performance and safety. For example, an
input filter may screen out user instructions which are manipulative, malicious or
outside the domain for which the AI LM is designed to be used, or an output filter may
screen the output for inaccuracies or inappropriate language before providing a
response to the user.

8.

Whilst AI LMs may have multilingual capabilities, some models are mainly trained in
the English language. Where content filtering and prompt engineering are
implemented in an AI LM for use in multiple languages, their effectiveness may need
to be tested for different languages.

RAG
9.

Whilst RAG may help reduce hallucination, information integration poses a challenge
for RAG. RAG may still produce inaccurate output when (i) the answer requires input
from multiple sources and not all relevant sources are retrieved or appropriately
prioritised, (ii) different factual data from longer text is not picked up correctly, or (iii)
some retrieved sources are not effectively consolidated into the answer 5. As such, it
may be necessary to separately test the various components of the LC’s
implementation of RAG, such as retrieval accuracy and generation quality.

10.

Citing the sources of the information to show the provenance of the data used to
generate the response would enable the user to verify and fact-check the information
outputted, but citation accuracy is not guaranteed. Some AI LMs have generated fake
or non-existent citations.

Core Principle 3: Cybersecurity and data risk management
11.

The trend of AI LMs having larger context windows can support more use cases.
However, enabling users to input more information into the model may also offer
increased scope for adversarial attacks through crafting long, complex user prompts.

12.

System prompts which constrain the behaviour of AI LMs may still be at risk of being
circumvented via direct and indirect prompt injection attacks. These attacks may
affect output integrity or result in data leakage 6.

13.

Retaining memory of a user’s previous prompts may improve user experience for
particular use cases. However, as the length of conversation with an AI LM chatbot
increases, the opportunity for jailbreak attacks also increases, as pre-set system
prompt guardrails may be diluted or distracted through multi-turn dialogue 7. Whilst
good system prompt design may be able to mitigate the impact of simpler attacks,
additional risk mitigation measures may be necessary to defend against multi-turn
jailbreak attacks 8.

5

Further, complex questions have higher error rates, and AI LMs may not handle formatted tabular data well.
As an example, an attacker with access to Slack AI was able to prompt Slack AI to exfiltrate data from private channels even if
the attacker was not a member of the private channels.
7
Anthropic, Many-shot jailbreaking.
8
See for example the Crescendo attack outlined by Microsoft.
6

54/F, One Island East, 18 Westlands Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong
香港鰂魚涌華蘭路 18 號港島東中心 54 樓
+852 2231 1222

www.sfc.hk

Page 3 of 4

14.

Thefts of users’ sensitive information, such as facial images and fingerprints, using
model-inversion and hill-climbing attacks against biometric systems have been
reported before. Such attacks targeting AI LMs have also been successful.
Membership inference, which is another type of attack, does not recover the training
data, but, instead, recovers information about whether or not a particular individual
was in the training set. In addition, recent research managed to circumvent privacy
safeguards and extract a portion of an AI LM’s training data by prompting it to repeat
certain words. Moreover, data poisoning attacks attempt to trick an AI LM by
maliciously manipulating the training data so that it learns to output the wrong result
based on the tainted training dataset. Attackers can activate the backdoor by sending
specific input to the corrupted model to obtain the desired (manipulated) output.

15.

Although privacy enhancing techniques may protect AI LMs against data exfiltration,
privacy side channel attacks are found to be possible when content filters are
introduced to machine learning models.

16.

The terms of use of some commercial AI LMs allow the Third Party Provider to use
information supplied by the user for its own purposes (such as further training the AI
LM to improve model performance). There have been reports that confidential
information supplied by users in prompts to the AI LM were visible to other unrelated
users of the same AI LM. As such, LCs using a Third Party Provider’s AI LM should
ascertain whether any information it supplies to the AI LM would be used by the Third
Party Provider for its own purposes, whether such information is in the form of
training data to fine-tune the AI LM or information included in the context window
when prompting the AI LM. The LCs should also take appropriate measures to
ensure the confidentiality of the relevant information.

17.

When considering data privacy risks, LCs should beware that the applicable personal
data privacy laws may include laws in the jurisdiction where personal data is collected
or processed.

Core Principle 4: Third Party Provider risk management
Contractual terms of use
18.

LCs should beware of any use restrictions stipulated in the terms of use for the Third
Party Provider’s AI LM. For example, the user may be prohibited from using the
service to develop machine learning models or related technology 9.

19.

AI LMs provided by Third Party Providers may require certain disclosure to users. For
example, according to Anthropic’s Commercial Terms of Service (effective 4 March
2024), the customer acknowledges, and must notify its users, that users should not
rely upon factual assertions in output without independently checking their accuracy,
as they may be false, incomplete, misleading or not reflective of recent events or
information.

9

See for example Google’s Generative AI Additional Terms of Service, August 9, 2023 version.

54/F, One Island East, 18 Westlands Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong
香港鰂魚涌華蘭路 18 號港島東中心 54 樓
+852 2231 1222

www.sfc.hk

Page 4 of 4

