PROSPECTUS
                                                                   Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                                              (Incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                                            (acting through its head office or its Madeira branch or its Cayman Islands branch
                                                              or its London branch or its Luxembourg branch)


                                                                                                and
                                                                             BES Finance Ltd.
                                                            (Incorporated with limited liability in the Cayman Islands)
                                                         unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by
                                                                   Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                                                    (Incorporated with limited liability in Portugal)
                                                                            (acting through its London branch)
                                      €20,000,000,000 EURO MEDIUM TERM NOTE PROGRAMME
This Prospectus is valid for the purpose of the listing of Notes on the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and the admission to trading of the Notes on the regulated market of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange, for a period of one year from the date of publication. Any Notes (as defined below) issued under the Programme on or after the date of this Prospectus are issued subject
to the provisions herein. This Prospectus does not affect any Notes already issued. Under the €20,000,000,000 Euro Medium Term Note Programme (the “Programme”), each of Banco Espírito Santo,
S.A. (the “Bank” or “BES”), acting through its head office or its Madeira branch or its Cayman Islands branch or its London branch or its Luxembourg branch, and BES Finance Ltd. (“BES Finance”
and, together with the Bank in its capacity as an issuer of Notes under the Programme, the “Issuers” and each an “Issuer”) may from time to time and, subject to applicable laws and regulations, issue
notes (the “Notes”, which will include Senior Notes and Subordinated Notes (as such terms are defined below)) denominated in any currency agreed between the Issuer of such Notes (the “relevant
Issuer”) and the relevant Dealer (as defined below).
The payments of all amounts owing in respect of the Notes issued by BES Finance will be unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by the Bank, acting through its London branch, pursuant to the
Trust Deed (as defined herein).
The Final Terms (as defined below) for each Tranche (as defined on page 90) of Notes will state whether the Notes of such Tranche are to be (i) senior Notes which, in the case of Notes issued by BES
Finance, will be guaranteed on an unsubordinated basis (“Senior Notes”) or (ii) dated subordinated Notes which, in the case of Notes issued by BES Finance, will be guaranteed on a subordinated basis
(“Subordinated Notes”).
The maximum aggregate nominal amount of all Notes from time to time outstanding under the Programme will not exceed €20,000,000,000 or such greater amount as may be agreed from time to time
in accordance with the terms of the Programme Agreement (or its equivalent in other currencies calculated as described herein). The Notes may be issued on a continuing basis to one or more of the
Dealers specified below and any additional Dealer appointed under the Programme from time to time, which appointment may be for a specific issue or on an ongoing basis (each a “Dealer” and
together the “Dealers”). References in this Prospectus to the “relevant Dealer” shall, in the case of an issue of Notes being (or intended to be) subscribed by more than one Dealer, be to all Dealers
agreeing to purchase such Notes.
An investment in Notes issued under the Programme involves certain risks. For a discussion of these risks see “Risk Factors”.
Application has been made to the Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier (the “CSSF”) in its capacity as competent authority under the Luxembourg Act dated 10th July, 2005 on
prospectuses for securities, as amended (the “Prospectus Act 2005”) to approve this document as a base prospectus for the purposes of Directive 2003/71/EC as amended (which includes the
amendments made by Directive 2010/73/EU to the extent that such amendments have been implemented in a relevant Member State of the European Economic Area) (the “Prospectus Directive”). The
CSSF assumes no responsibility as to the economic and financial soundness of the transactions contemplated by this Prospectus or the quality or solvency of the Issuers in accordance with Article 7(7)
of the Prospectus Act 2005. Application has also been made to the Luxembourg Stock Exchange for Notes issued under the Programme to be admitted to trading on the Regulated Market of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange and to be listed on the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. References in this Base Prospectus to Notes being "listed" (and all related references) shall mean
that such Notes have been admitted to trading on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange's regulated market and have been listed on the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. The Luxembourg
Stock Exchange's regulated market is a regulated market for the purposes of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (Directive 2004/39/EC).
Notice of the aggregate nominal amount of Notes, interest (if any) payable in respect of Notes, the issue price of Notes and certain other information which is applicable to each Tranche of Notes will
be set forth in the final terms (the “Final Terms”) which, with respect to Notes to be listed on the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and admitted to trading on the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange, will be filed with the CSSF. Copies of Final Terms in relation to Notes to be listed on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange will also be published on the website of the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange (www.bourse.lu).
The Programme provides that Notes may be listed or admitted to trading, as the case may be, on such other or further stock exchanges or markets as may be agreed between the relevant Issuer, and the
relevant Dealer. Each Issuer may also issue unlisted Notes.
In the case of Notes held through Interbolsa-Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa”) (each an “Interbolsa Note”) the
Notes of each Tranche will be in book-entry form (forma escritural) and can be either registered Notes (nominativas) or bearer Notes (ao portador), as specified in the applicable Final Terms. The
Notes of each Tranche (other than Interbolsa Notes) will be in bearer form. Bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes will (unless otherwise specified in the applicable Final Terms) initially be
represented by a temporary global Note, which may be in new global note form, which will be exchangeable either for interests in a permanent global Note or for definitive Notes, as indicated in the
applicable Final Terms, all as further described in “Form of the Notes” below.
The relevant Issuer, the Bank, acting through its London branch, (where the relevant Issuer is BES Finance) and (in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee may agree with any Dealer
that Notes may be issued in a form not contemplated by the Terms and Conditions of the Notes herein, in which event a supplement to this Prospectus, a drawdown base prospectus or a new base
prospectus, if appropriate, will be made available which will describe the effect of the agreement reached in relation to such Notes.
Notes issued under the Programme may be rated or unrated. Where a Tranche of Notes is rated, such rating will be disclosed in the applicable Final Terms. Whether or not each credit rating applied for
in relation to relevant Series of Notes will be issued by a credit rating agency established in the European Union and registered under Regulation (EC) No. 1060/2009 (as amended) (the “CRA
Regulation”) will be disclosed clearly and prominently in the Final Terms. A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to suspension, reduction or
withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating agency.
The Bank has a rating of “BB-” by Standard & Poor’s Credit Market Services Europe Limited (“S&P”), “Ba3” by Moody’s Investors Service España, S.A. (“Moody’s”) and “BBB (low)” by DBRS,
Inc. (“DBRS”). S&P, Moody’s and DBRS are established in the European Union and are registered under the CRA Regulation (as amended). As such S&P, Moody’s and DBRS are included in the list
of credit rating agencies published by the European Securities and Markets Authority on its website in accordance with such Regulation.

                                                                                              Arranger
                                                                                               HSBC

                                                                                               Dealers
BANCA IMI                                                                                                                                                    BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO
BARCLAYS                                                                                                                                                              BNP PARIBAS
BOFA MERRILL LYNCH                                                                                                                                                       CITIGROUP
COMMERZBANK                                                                                                                                                   CRÉDIT AGRICOLE CIB
CREDIT SUISSE                                                                                                                                                     DEUTSCHE BANK
ESPIRITO SANTO INVESTMENT BANK                                                                                                                      GOLDMAN SACHS INTERNATIONAL
HSBC                                                                                                                                                                   J.P. MORGAN
LANDESBANK BADEN - WÜRTTEMBERG                                                                                                                           MITSUBISHI UFJ SECURITIES
MORGAN STANLEY                                                                                                                                                              NOMURA
SOCIÉTÉ GÉNÉRALE CORPORATE & INVESTMENT BANKING                                                                                                       THE ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND
UBS INVESTMENT BANK                                                                                                                                               UNICREDIT BANK

                                                                         The date of this Prospectus is 17th July, 2013
                                   IMPORTANT INFORMATION

This Prospectus comprises a base prospectus for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus
Directive.

Each of BES Finance and the Bank accepts responsibility for the information contained in this
Prospectus and the Final Terms (as defined below) for each Tranche of Notes issued under the
Programme. To the best of the knowledge and belief of BES Finance and the Bank (each having taken
all reasonable care to ensure that such is the case), the information contained in this Prospectus is in
accordance with the facts and does not omit anything likely to affect the import of such information.

This Prospectus is to be read in conjunction with all documents which are deemed to be incorporated
herein by reference (see “Documents Incorporated by Reference” below). This Prospectus shall be
read and construed on the basis that such documents are incorporated and form part of this
Prospectus. Each of BES Finance and the Bank accepts responsibility for the accuracy of the
translations into English of such documents.

Neither the Dealers nor the Trustee have separately verified the information contained herein.
Accordingly, no representation, warranty or undertaking, express or implied, is made and no
responsibility or liability is accepted by the Dealers or the Trustee as to the accuracy or completeness
of the information contained in this Prospectus or any other information provided by BES Finance or
the Bank in connection with the Programme or the Notes or their distribution. The statements made in
this paragraph are made without prejudice to the responsibility of BES Finance and the Bank under
the Programme.

No person is or has been authorised to give any information or to make any representation not
contained in or not consistent with this Prospectus or any other information supplied in connection
with the Programme or the Notes and, if given or made, such information or representation must not
be relied upon as having been authorised by BES Finance, the Bank, the Trustee or any of the Dealers.

Neither this Prospectus nor any other information supplied in connection with the Programme or any
Notes (i) is intended to provide the basis of any credit or other evaluation or (ii) should be considered
as a recommendation or constituting an invitation or offer by BES Finance, the Bank, the Trustee or
any of the Dealers that any recipient of this Prospectus or any other information supplied in
connection with the Programme or any Notes should purchase any Notes. Each investor contemplating
purchasing any Notes should make its own independent investigation of the financial condition and
affairs, and its own appraisal of the creditworthiness, of BES Finance and/or the Bank. Neither this
Prospectus nor any other information supplied in connection with the Programme or the issue of any
Notes constitutes an offer or invitation by or on behalf of BES Finance or the Bank or any of the
Dealers or the Trustee to any person to subscribe for or to purchase any Notes.

Neither the delivery of this Prospectus nor the offering, sale or delivery of any Notes shall in any
circumstances imply that the information contained herein concerning BES Finance and/or the Bank
is correct at any time subsequent to the date hereof or that any other information supplied in
connection with the Programme is correct as of any time subsequent to the date indicated in the
document containing the same. The Dealers and the Trustee expressly do not undertake to review the
financial condition or affairs of BES Finance or the Bank during the life of the Programme or to
advise any investor in the Notes of any information coming to their attention.




                                                    1
       IMPORTANT INFORMATION RELATING TO NON-EXEMPT OFFERS OF NOTES

Restrictions on Non-exempt offers of Notes in Relevant Member States

Certain Tranches of Notes with a denomination of less than €100,000 (or its equivalent in any other
currency) may be offered in circumstances where there is no exemption from the obligation under the
Prospectus Directive to publish a prospectus. Any such offer is referred to as a Non-exempt Offer. This
Prospectus has been prepared on a basis that permits Non-exempt Offers of Notes. However, any person
making or intending to make a Non-exempt Offer of Notes in any Member State of the European Economic
Area which has implemented the Prospectus Directive (each, a Relevant Member State) may only do so if
this Prospectus has been approved by the competent authority in that Relevant Member State (or, where
appropriate, approved in another Relevant Member State and notified to the competent authority in that
Relevant Member State) and published in accordance with the Prospectus Directive, provided that the
relevant Issuer has consented to the use of this Prospectus in connection with such offer as provided under
"Consent given in accordance with Article 3.2 of the Prospectus Directive (Retail Cascades)" and the
conditions attached to that consent are complied with by the person making the Non-exempt Offer of such
Notes.

Save as provided above, none of BES Finance, the Bank and any Dealer has authorised, nor do they
authorise, the making of any Non-exempt Offer of Notes in circumstances in which an obligation arises for
the relevant Issuer or any Dealer to publish or supplement a prospectus for such offer.

Consent given in accordance with Article 3.2 of the Prospectus Directive (Retail Cascades)

In the context of a Non-exempt Offer of such Notes, the relevant Issuer accepts responsibility, in the
jurisdictions to which the consent to use the Prospectus extends, for the content of this Prospectus under
Article 6 of the Prospectus Directive in relation to any person (an Investor) who acquires any Notes in a
Non-exempt Offer made by any person to whom such Issuer has given consent to the use of this Prospectus
(an Authorised Offeror) in that connection, provided that the conditions attached to that consent are
complied with by the Authorised Offeror. The consent and conditions attached to it are set out under
"Consent" and "Common Conditions to Consent" below.

None of BES Finance, the Bank or any Dealer makes any representation as to the compliance by an
Authorised Offeror with any applicable conduct of business rules or other applicable regulatory or securities
law requirements in relation to any Non-exempt Offer and none of the Issuers or any Dealer has any
responsibility or liability for the actions of that Authorised Offeror.

Except in the circumstances set out in the following paragraphs, none of BES Finance, the Bank and
any Dealer has authorised the making of any Non-exempt Offer by any offeror and the relevant Issuer
has not consented to the use of this Prospectus by any other person in connection with any Non-exempt
Offer of Notes. Any Non-exempt Offer made without the consent of the relevant Issuer is
unauthorised and none of BES Finance, the Bank and any Dealer accepts any responsibility or liability
for the actions of the persons making any such unauthorised offer. If, in the context of a Non-exempt
Offer, an Investor is offered Notes by a person which is not an Authorised Offeror, the Investor should check
with that person whether anyone is responsible for this Prospectus for the purposes of Article 6 of the
Prospectus Directive in the context of the Non-Exempt Offer and, if so, who that person is. If the Investor is
in any doubt about whether it can rely on this Prospectus and/or who is responsible for its contents it should
take legal advice.




                                                      2
In connection with each Tranche of Notes and subject to the conditions set out below under "Common
Conditions to Consent":

(a)    the relevant Issuer consents to the use of this Prospectus (as supplemented as at the relevant time, if
       applicable) in connection with a Non-exempt Offer of such Notes during the relevant Offer Period
       stated in the applicable Final Terms by the relevant Dealer and by:

       (i)     any financial intermediary named as an Initial Authorised Offeror in the applicable Final
               Terms; and

       (ii)    any financial intermediary appointed after the date of the applicable Final Terms and whose
               name is published on the Bank’s website (www.bes.pt) and identified as an Authorised
               Offeror in respect of the relevant Non-exempt Offer;

(b)    if (and only if) Part B of the applicable Final Terms specifies "General Consent" as "Applicable", the
       relevant Issuer hereby offers to grant its consent to the use of this Prospectus (as supplemented as at
       the relevant time, if applicable) in connection with a Non-exempt Offer of Notes during the relevant
       Offer Period stated in the applicable Final Terms by any financial intermediary which satisfies the
       following conditions:

       (i)     it is authorised to make such offers under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000, as
               amended, or other applicable legislation implementing the Markets in Financial Instruments
               Directive (Directive 2004/39/EC) (in which regard, Investors should consult the register
               maintained by the Financial Conduct Authority at: www.fsa.gov.uk/register/home.do); and

       (ii)    it accepts the relevant Issuer's offer to grant consent to the use of this Prospectus by
               publishing on its website the following statement (with the information in square brackets
               completed with the relevant information):

               "We, [insert legal name of financial intermediary], refer to the [insert title of relevant
               Notes] (the "Notes") described in the Final Terms dated [insert date] (the "Final Terms")
               published by [BES Finance Ltd.]/[Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.] (the "Issuer"). We hereby
               accept the offer by the Issuer of its consent to our use of the Prospectus (as defined in the
               Final Terms) in connection with the offer of the Notes in accordance with the Authorised
               Offeror Terms and subject to the conditions to such consent, each as specified in the
               Prospectus, and we are using the Prospectus accordingly."

       The Authorised Offeror Terms, being the terms to which the relevant financial intermediary agrees
       in connection with using the Prospectus, are that the relevant financial intermediary:

       (A)     will, and it agrees, represents, warrants and undertakes for the benefit of BES Finance, the
               Bank and the relevant Dealer that it will, at all times in connection with the relevant Non-
               exempt Offer:

               I.      act in accordance with, and be solely responsible for complying with, all applicable
                       laws, rules, regulations and guidance of any applicable regulatory bodies (the
                       Rules), including the Rules published by the United Kingdom Financial Conduct
                       Authority (FCA) (including its guidance for distributors in "The Responsibilities of
                       Providers and Distributors for the Fair Treatment of Customers") from time to time
                       including, without limitation and in each case, Rules relating to both the
                       appropriateness or suitability of any investment in the Notes by any person and
                       disclosure to any potential Investor, and will immediately inform the relevant Issuer,
                       the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) and the relevant Dealer if at any time
                       such financial intermediary becomes aware or suspects that it is or may be in

                                                     3
        violation of any Rules and take all appropriate steps to remedy such violation and
        comply with such Rules in all respects;

II.     comply with the restrictions set out under "Subscription and Sale" in this Prospectus
        which would apply as if it were a Dealer;

III.    ensure that any fee (and any other commissions or benefits of any kind) received or
        paid by that financial intermediary in relation to the offer or sale of the Notes does
        not violate the Rules and, to the extent required by the Rules, is fully and clearly
        disclosed to Investors or potential Investors;

IV.     hold all licences, consents, approvals and permissions required in connection with
        solicitation of interest in, or offers or sales of, the Notes under the Rules, including
        authorisation under the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000;

V.      comply with applicable anti-money laundering, anti-bribery, anti-corruption and
        "know your client" Rules (including, without limitation, taking appropriate steps, in
        compliance with such Rules, to establish and document the identity of each potential
        Investor prior to initial investment in any Notes by the Investor), and will not permit
        any application for Notes in circumstances where the financial intermediary has any
        suspicions as to the source of the application monies;

VI.     retain Investor identification records for at least the minimum period required under
        applicable Rules, and shall, if so requested, make such records available to the
        relevant Dealer, the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or
        directly to the appropriate authorities with jurisdiction over the relevant Issuer, the
        Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) and/or the relevant Dealer in order to enable
        the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) and/or the relevant
        Dealer to comply with anti-money laundering, anti-bribery, anti-corruption and
        "know your client" Rules applying to the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer
        is BES Finance) and/or the relevant Dealer;

VII.    ensure that no holder of Notes or potential Investor in Notes shall become an
        indirect or direct client of the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
        Finance) or the relevant Dealer for the purposes of any applicable Rules from time
        to time, and to the extent that any client obligations are created by the relevant
        financial intermediary under any applicable Rules, then such financial intermediary
        shall perform any such obligations so arising;

VIII.   co-operate with the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) and
        the relevant Dealer in providing such information (including, without limitation,
        documents and records maintained pursuant to paragraph (VI) above) upon written
        request from the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or the
        relevant Dealer as is available to such financial intermediary or which is within its
        power and control from time to time, together with such further assistance as is
        reasonably requested by the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
        Finance) or the relevant Dealer:

        (i)     in connection with any request or investigation by any regulator in relation
                to the Notes, the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance)
                or the relevant Dealer; and/or




                                      4
        (ii)    in connection with any complaints received by the relevant Issuer, the Bank
                (where the Issuer is BES Finance and/or the relevant Dealer relating to the
                relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) and/or the
                relevant Dealer or another Authorised Offeror including, without limitation,
                complaints as defined in rules published by any regulator of competent
                jurisdiction from time to time; and/or

        (iii)   which the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or the
                relevant Dealer may reasonably require from time to time in relation to the
                Notes and/or as to allow the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is
                BES Finance) or the relevant Dealer fully to comply with its own legal, tax
                and regulatory requirements,

        in each case, as soon as is reasonably practicable and, in any event, within any time
        frame set by any such regulator or regulatory process;

IX.     during the period of the initial offering of the Notes: (i) only sell the Notes at the
        Issue Price specified in the applicable Final Terms (unless otherwise agreed with the
        relevant Dealer); (ii) only sell the Notes for settlement on the Issue Date specified in
        the relevant Final Terms; (iii) not appoint any sub-distributors (unless otherwise
        agreed with the relevant Dealer); (iv) not pay any fee or remuneration or
        commissions or benefits to any third parties in relation to the offering or sale of the
        Notes (unless otherwise agreed with the relevant Dealer); and (v) comply with such
        other rules of conduct as may be reasonably required and specified by the relevant
        Dealer;

X.      either (i) obtain from each potential Investor an executed application for the Notes,
        or (ii) keep a record of all requests such financial intermediary (x) makes for its
        discretionary management clients, (y) receives from its advisory clients and (z)
        receives from its execution-only clients, in each case prior to making any order for
        the Notes on their behalf, and in each case maintain the same on its files for so long
        as is required by any applicable Rules;

XI.     ensure that it does not, directly or indirectly, cause the relevant Issuer, the Bank
        (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or the relevant Dealer to breach any Rule or
        subject the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or the
        relevant Dealer to any requirement to obtain or make any filing, authorisation or
        consent in any jurisdiction;

XII.    comply with the conditions to the consent referred to under "Common conditions to
        consent" below and any further requirements relevant to the Non-exempt Offer as
        specified in the applicable Final Terms;

XIII.   make available to each potential Investor in the Notes the Prospectus (as
        supplemented as at the relevant time, if applicable), the applicable Final Terms and
        any applicable information booklet provided by the relevant Issuer for such purpose,
        and not convey or publish any information that is not contained in or entirely
        consistent with the Prospectus and the applicable Final Terms; and

XIV.    if it conveys or publishes any communication (other than the Prospectus or any other
        materials provided to such financial intermediary by or on behalf of the relevant
        Issuer for the purposes of the relevant Non-exempt Offer) in connection with the
        relevant Non-exempt Offer, it will ensure that such communication (A) is fair, clear


                                      5
              and not misleading and complies with the Rules, (B) states that such financial
              intermediary has provided such communication independently of the relevant Issuer,
              that such financial intermediary is solely responsible for such communication and
              that none of the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) and the
              relevant Dealer accepts any responsibility for such communication and (C) does not,
              without the prior written consent of the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is
              BES Finance) or the relevant Dealer (as applicable), use the legal or publicity names
              of the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or the relevant
              Dealer or any other name, brand or logo registered by an entity within their
              respective groups or any material over which any such entity retains a proprietary
              interest, except to describe BES Finance or the Bank, as the case may be, as issuer
              of the relevant Notes and the Bank as the guarantor of the relevant Notes on the
              basis set out in the Prospectus;

(B)   agrees and undertakes to indemnify each of the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is
      BES Finance) and the relevant Dealer (in each case on behalf of such entity and its
      respective directors, officers, employees, agents, affiliates and controlling persons) against
      any losses, liabilities, costs, claims, charges, expenses, actions or demands (including
      reasonable costs of investigation and any defence raised thereto and counsel’s fees and
      disbursements associated with any such investigation or defence) which any of them may
      incur or which may be made against any of them arising out of or in relation to, or in
      connection with, any breach of any of the foregoing agreements, representations, warranties
      or undertakings by such financial intermediary, including (without limitation) any
      unauthorised action by such financial intermediary or failure by such financial intermediary
      to observe any of the above restrictions or requirements or the making by such financial
      intermediary of any unauthorised representation or the giving or use by it of any information
      which has not been authorised for such purposes by the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the
      Issuer is BES Finance) or the relevant Dealer; and

(C)   agrees and accepts that:

      I.      the contract between the relevant Issuer and the financial intermediary formed upon
              acceptance by the financial intermediary of the relevant Issuer’s offer to use the
              Prospectus with its consent in connection with the relevant Non-Exempt Offer (the
              Authorised Offeror Contract), and any non-contractual obligations arising out of
              or in connection with the Authorised Offeror Contract, shall be governed by, and
              construed in accordance with, English law;

      II.     subject to IV below, the English courts have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any
              dispute arising out of or in connection with the Authorised Offeror Contract
              (including any dispute relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in
              connection with the Authorised Offeror Contract) (a Dispute) and the relevant
              Issuer and the financial intermediary submit to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
              English courts;

      III.    for the purposes of (C)(II) and (IV), the financial intermediary waives any objection
              to the English courts on the grounds that they are an inconvenient or inappropriate
              forum to settle any dispute;

      IV.     to the extent allowed by law, the relevant Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
              Finance) and each relevant Dealer may, in respect of any Dispute or Disputes, take
              (i) proceedings in any other court with jurisdiction; and (ii) concurrent proceedings
              in any number of jurisdictions; and


                                            6
                V.      each relevant Dealer and (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the Bank will, pursuant
                        to the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999, be entitled to enforce those
                        provisions of the Authorised Offeror Contract which are, or are expressed to be, for
                        their benefit, including the agreements, representations, warranties, undertakings and
                        indemnity given by the financial intermediary pursuant to the Authorised Offeror
                        Terms.

                Any financial intermediary who is an Authorised Offeror falling within (b) above who
                meets all of the conditions set out in (b) and the other conditions stated in "Common
                Conditions to Consent" below and who wishes to use this Prospectus in connection with
                a Non-exempt Offer is required, for the duration of the relevant Offer Period, to
                publish on its website the statement (duly completed) specified at paragraph (b)(ii)
                above.

Common Conditions to Consent

The conditions to the relevant Issuer's consent to the use of this Prospectus in the context of the relevant
Non-exempt Offer are (in addition to the conditions described in paragraph (b) above if Part B of the
applicable Final Terms specifies "General Consent" as "Applicable") that such consent:

(i)     is only valid during the Offer Period specified in the applicable Final Terms;

(ii)    only extends to the use of this Prospectus to make Non-exempt Offers of the relevant Tranche of
        Notes in Portugal and Luxembourg, as specified in the applicable Final Terms; and

(iii)   the consent is subject to any other conditions set out in Part B of the applicable Final Terms.

The only Relevant Member States which may, in respect of any Tranche of Notes, be specified in the
applicable Final Terms (if any Relevant Member States are so specified) as indicated in (ii) above, will be
Portugal and Luxembourg, and accordingly each Tranche of Notes may only be offered to Investors as part
of a Non-exempt Offer in Portugal and Luxembourg, as specified in the applicable Final Terms, or otherwise
in circumstances in which no obligation arises for the relevant Issuer or any Dealer to publish or supplement
a prospectus for such offer.

ARRANGEMENTS BETWEEN INVESTORS AND AUTHORISED OFFERORS

AN INVESTOR INTENDING TO PURCHASE OR PURCHASING ANY NOTES IN A NON-
EXEMPT OFFER FROM AN AUTHORISED OFFEROR WILL DO SO, AND OFFERS AND
SALES OF SUCH NOTES TO AN INVESTOR BY SUCH AUTHORISED OFFEROR WILL BE
MADE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE OFFER IN PLACE
BETWEEN SUCH AUTHORISED OFFEROR AND SUCH INVESTOR INCLUDING
ARRANGEMENTS IN RELATION TO PRICE, ALLOCATIONS, EXPENSES AND
SETTLEMENT. THE RELEVANT ISSUER WILL NOT BE A PARTY TO ANY SUCH
ARRANGEMENTS WITH SUCH INVESTORS IN CONNECTION WITH THE NON-EXEMPT
OFFER OR SALE OF THE NOTES CONCERNED AND, ACCORDINGLY, THIS PROSPECTUS
AND ANY FINAL TERMS WILL NOT CONTAIN SUCH INFORMATION. THE RELEVANT
INFORMATION WILL BE PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORISED OFFEROR AT THE TIME OF
SUCH OFFER. NONE OF BES FINANCE, THE BANK AND ANY DEALER (EXCEPT WHERE
SUCH DEALER IS THE RELEVANT AUTHORISED OFFEROR) HAS ANY RESPONSIBILITY
OR LIABILITY TO AN INVESTOR IN RESPECT OF THE INFORMATION DESCRIBED
ABOVE.




                                                       7
IMPORTANT INFORMATION RELATING TO THE USE OF THIS PROSPECTUS AND OFFERS
                         OF NOTES GENERALLY

This Prospectus does not constitute an offer to sell or the solicitation of an offer to buy any Notes in any
jurisdiction to any person to whom it is unlawful to make the offer or solicitation in such jurisdiction. The
distribution of this Prospectus and the offer or sale of Notes may be restricted by law in certain jurisdictions.
BES Finance, the Bank, the Dealers and the Trustee do not represent that this Prospectus may be lawfully
distributed, or that any Notes may be lawfully offered, in compliance with any applicable registration or
other requirements in any such jurisdiction, or pursuant to an exemption available thereunder, or assume any
responsibility for facilitating any such distribution or offering. In particular, unless specifically indicated to
the contrary in the applicable Final Terms, no action has been taken by BES Finance, the Bank, the Dealers
or the Trustee which is intended to permit a public offering of any Notes or distribution of this Prospectus in
any jurisdiction where action for that purpose is required. Accordingly, no Notes may be offered or sold,
directly or indirectly, and neither this Prospectus nor any advertisement or other offering material may be
distributed or published in any jurisdiction, except under circumstances that will result in compliance with
any applicable laws and regulations. Persons into whose possession this Prospectus or any Notes may come
must inform themselves about, and observe, any such restrictions on the distribution of this Prospectus and
the offering and sale of Notes. In particular, there are restrictions on the distribution of this Prospectus and
the offer or sale of Notes in the United States, the European Economic Area (including the United Kingdom,
Italy, Luxembourg and Portugal), Cayman Islands and Japan, see "Subscription and Sale".

All references in this document to “U.S. dollars” and “U.S.$” refer to United States dollars, those to
“Sterling”, and “£” refer to pounds sterling, and those to “Euro”, “EUR” and “€” refer to the currency
introduced at the start of the third stage of European economic and monetary union pursuant to the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union, as amended.

No invitation may be made to the public in the Cayman Islands to subscribe for the Notes.

The Notes may not be a suitable investment for all investors. Each potential investor in the Notes must
determine the suitability of that investment in light of its own circumstances. In particular, each potential
investor may wish to consider, either on its own or with the help of its financial and other professional
advisers, whether it:

(i)     has sufficient knowledge and experience to make a meaningful evaluation of the Notes, the merits
        and risks of investing in the Notes and the information contained or incorporated by reference in this
        Prospectus or any applicable supplement;

(ii)    has access to, and knowledge of, appropriate analytical tools to evaluate, in the context of its
        particular financial situation, an investment in the Notes and the impact the Notes will have on its
        overall investment portfolio;

(iii)   has sufficient financial resources and liquidity to bear all of the risks of an investment in the Notes,
        including Notes where the currency for principal or interest payments is different from the potential
        investor's currency;

(iv)    understands thoroughly the terms of the Notes and is familiar with the behaviour of financial
        markets; and

(v)     is able to evaluate possible scenarios for economic, interest rate and other factors that may affect its
        investment and its ability to bear the applicable risks.

Legal investment considerations may restrict certain investments. The investment activities of certain
investors are subject to legal investment laws and regulations, or review or regulation by certain authorities.
Each potential investor should consult its legal advisers to determine whether and to what extent (1) Notes

                                                        8
are legal investments for it, (2) Notes can be used as collateral for various types of borrowing and (3) other
restrictions apply to its purchase or pledge of any Notes. Financial institutions should consult their legal
advisers or the appropriate regulators to determine the appropriate treatment of Notes under any applicable
risk-based capital or similar rules.

The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as
amended, (the “Securities Act”) and are subject to U.S. tax law requirements. Subject to certain exceptions,
Notes may not be offered, sold or delivered within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of,
U.S. persons (see "Subscription and Sale").




                                                      9
                                                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                                               Page

Summary........................................................................................................................................................... 11
Risk Factors ...................................................................................................................................................... 31
General Description of the Programme ............................................................................................................ 57
Documents Incorporated by Reference ............................................................................................................ 58
Form of the Notes ............................................................................................................................................. 61
Applicable Final Terms .................................................................................................................................... 64
Terms and Conditions of the Notes .................................................................................................................. 89
Use of Proceeds .............................................................................................................................................. 130
Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. and BES Group ................................................................................................... 136
Taxation .......................................................................................................................................................... 202
Subscription and Sale ..................................................................................................................................... 218
General Information ....................................................................................................................................... 222

                                                                    STABILISATION

In connection with the issue of any Tranche of Notes, the Dealer or Dealers (if any) named as the
Stabilising Manager(s) (or persons acting on behalf of any Stabilising Manager(s)) in the applicable
Final Terms may over-allot Notes or effect transactions with a view to supporting the market price of
the Notes at a level higher than that which might otherwise prevail. However, there is no assurance
that the Stabilising Manager(s) (or persons acting on behalf of a Stabilising Manager) will undertake
stabilisation action. Any stabilisation action may begin on or after the date on which adequate public
disclosure of the terms of the offer of the relevant Tranche of Notes is made and, if begun, may be
ended at any time, but it must end no later than the earlier of 30 days after the issue date of the
relevant Tranche of Notes and 60 days after the date of the allotment of the relevant Tranche of Notes.
Any stabilisation action or over-allotment must be conducted by the relevant Stabilising Manager(s)
(or persons acting on behalf of any Stabilising Manager(s)) in accordance with all applicable laws and
rules.




                                                                                 10
                                               SUMMARY

Summaries are made up of disclosure requirements known as “Elements”. These Elements are numbered in
Sections A – E (A.1 – E.7). This Summary contains all the Elements required to be included in a summary
for the Notes and the relevant Issuer. Because some Elements are not required to be addressed, there may be
gaps in the numbering sequence of the Elements. Even though an Element may be required to be inserted in
a summary because of the type of securities and issuer, it is possible that no relevant information can be
given regarding the Element. In this case a short description of the Element should be included in the
summary explaining why it is not applicable.

Section A – Introduction and warnings



Element     Title

A.1         Introduction       Warning that:
            and Warnings
                                  this summary should be read as introduction to the Prospectus;

                                  any decision to invest in the Notes should be based on consideration
                                   of the Prospectus as a whole by the investor;

                                  where a claim relating to the information contained in the
                                   Prospectus is brought before a court, the plaintiff investor might,
                                   under the national legislation of the Member States, have to bear
                                   the costs of translating the Prospectus before the legal proceedings
                                   are initiated; and

                                  civil liability attaches only to those persons who have tabled the
                                   summary including any translation thereof, but only if the
                                   summary is misleading, inaccurate or inconsistent when read
                                   together with the other parts of the Prospectus or it does not
                                   provide, when read together with the other parts of the Prospectus,
                                   key information in order to aid investors when considering whether
                                   to invest in such securities.

A.2         Consent            [Certain Tranches of Notes with a denomination of less than €100,000 (or its
                               equivalent in any other currency) may be offered in circumstances where
                               there is no exemption from the obligation under the Prospectus Directive to
                               publish a prospectus. Any such offer is referred to as a Non-exempt Offer.]

                                [Consent: Subject to the conditions set out below, the Issuer consents to the
                               use of this Prospectus in connection with a Non-exempt Offer of Notes by
                               the Managers[, [names of specific financial intermediaries listed in final
                               terms,] [and] [each financial intermediary whose name is published on Banco
                               Espírito Santo, S.A.’s website (www.bes.pt) and identified as an Authorised
                               Offeror in respect of the relevant Non-exempt Offer] [and any financial
                               intermediary which is authorised to make such offers under [the Financial
                               Services and Markets Act 2000, as amended, or other ]applicable legislation
                               implementing the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (Directive
                               2004/39/EC) and publishes on its website the following statement (with the


                                                    11
Element    Title
                            information in square brackets being completed with the relevant
                            information):

                            "We, [insert legal name of financial intermediary], refer to the [insert title of
                            relevant Notes] (the "Notes") described in the Final Terms dated [insert
                            date] (the "Final Terms") published by [Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.] [BES
                            Finance Ltd.] (the "Issuer"). We hereby accept the offer by the Issuer of its
                            consent to our use of the Prospectus (as defined in the Final Terms) in
                            connection with the offer of the Notes in accordance with the Authorised
                            Offeror Terms and subject to the conditions to such consent, each as
                            specified in the Prospectus, and we are using the Prospectus accordingly.”]

                            (each an Authorised Offeror).

                            Offer period: The Issuer's consent referred to above is given for Non-exempt
                            Offers of Notes during [offer period for the issue to be specified here] (the
                            Offer Period).

                            Conditions to consent: The conditions to the Issuer’s consent [(in addition to
                            the conditions referred to above)] are that such consent (a) is only valid
                            during the Offer Period; (b) only extends to the use of this Prospectus to
                            make Non-exempt Offers of the relevant Tranche of Notes in [specify each
                            Relevant Member State in which the particular Tranche of Notes can be
                            offered]; [and] (c) [specify any other conditions applicable to the Non-
                            exempt Offer of the particular Tranche, as set out in the Final Terms [and (d)
                            ].

                            AN INVESTOR INTENDING TO ACQUIRE OR ACQUIRING ANY
                            NOTES IN A NON-EXEMPT OFFER FROM AN AUTHORISED
                            OFFEROR WILL DO SO, AND OFFERS AND SALES OF SUCH
                            NOTES TO AN INVESTOR BY SUCH AUTHORISED OFFEROR
                            WILL BE MADE, IN ACCORDANCE WITH ANY TERMS AND
                            OTHER ARRANGEMENTS IN PLACE BETWEEN SUCH
                            AUTHORISED OFFEROR AND SUCH INVESTOR INCLUDING AS
                            TO    PRICE,    ALLOCATIONS    AND    SETTLEMENT
                            ARRANGEMENTS.    THE INVESTOR MUST LOOK TO THE
                            AUTHORISED OFFEROR AT THE TIME OF SUCH OFFER FOR
                            THE PROVISION OF SUCH INFORMATION AND THE
                            AUTHORISED OFFEROR WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR SUCH
                            INFORMATION.]




Section B – Issuers and Guarantor



Element       Title

                                                  12
Element   Title

B.1       Legal and commercial            [Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. ("BES ");]
          name of the Issuer
                                          [BES Finance Ltd. ("BES Finance"),]

                                          ([each an] “Issuer”)

B.2       Domicile/    legal   form/      BES is a bank with limited liability (sociedade anonima)
          legislation/  country   of      incorporated and domiciled in Portugal under Portuguese
          incorporation                   Companies Code and Legal Framework of Credit
                                          Institutions and Financial Companies.

                                          BES Finance is an exempted company incorporated with
                                          limited liability in the Cayman Islands for an unlimited
                                          duration under the laws of the Cayman Islands.

B.4b      Trend information               Not Applicable - There are no known trends, uncertainties,
                                          demands, commitments or events that are reasonably likely
                                          to have a material effect on the relevant Issuer's prospects
                                          for its current financial year.

B.5       Description of the Group        BES is the parent company of the Group (as defined below).

                                          BES and its consolidated subsidiaries (together, the
                                          "Group") offer a full range of banking and financial
                                          services, including deposit taking, lending, asset
                                          management, leasing and factoring, investment banking and
                                          brokerage services.

                                          BES Finance is a wholly-owned subsidiary of BES.

B.9       Profit forecast or estimate     Not Applicable - No profit forecasts or estimates have been
                                          made in the Prospectus.

B.10      Audit report qualifications     Not Applicable - No qualifications are contained in any
                                          audit report included in the Prospectus.

B.12      Selected historical key financial information:

          BES Finance

          The following tables set out a summary of the financial information for BES Finance for
          each of the two years ended 31st December 2012 and 31st December 2011. This financial
          information was extracted without material adjustment from the audited financial statements
          of BES Finance for the financial years ended 31st December 2012 and 31st December 2011,
          respectively.

          Main Indicators (eur million)                                            2011       2012

          Total Assets                                                             4,921      3,192

          Total Liabilities                                                        4,684      2,967

                                              13
Element   Title

          Total Equity                                                          238          225

          Net Income                                                            -141          10

          BES

          The following tables set out a summary of the financial information for the Group on a
          consolidated basis for each of the two years ended 31st December 2012 and 31st December
          2011. This financial information was extracted without material adjustment from the
          consolidated financial statements of the Group for the financial years ended 31st December
          2012 and 31st December 2011, respectively.

                                MAIN INDICATORS                                 2011        2012

          ACTIVITY (eur million)

          Total Assets(1)                                                        98 589      97 765

          Net Assets                                                             80 237      83 691

          Customer Loans (gross)                                                 51 211      50 399

          Customer Deposits                                                      34 206      34 540

          Total Customer Funds                                                   54 383      56 188

          RESULTS/PROFITABILITY (%)

          Net Income (M€)                                                        -108,8        96,1

          Return on Equity (ROE)                                                  -0,1%       1,2%

          Return on Assets (ROA)                                                 0,00%       0,12%

          SOLVENCY RATIOS(2)

          - CORE TIER I - BoP                                                      9,2%      10,5%

          - CORE TIER I - EBA                                                          -      9,9%

          - TIER I                                                                 9,4%      10,4%

          - Total                                                                10,7%       11,3%

          LIQUIDITY (eur million)

          ECB funds (net)(3)                                                      8 677       6 897

          ECB Eligible Assets (collaterals)                                      15 057      19 402

          Loans to deposits Ratio(4)                                              141%        137%


                                              14
Element   Title

          ASSET QUALITY (%)

          Overdue Loans > 90 days / Gross Loans                                   2,74%       3,90%

          Provisions / Overdue Loans > 90 Days                                   154,5%      136,9%

          Credit at Risk(5)/Total Credit                                          6,59%       9,44%

          Credit Provisions/Credit at Risk(5)                                     64,2%       56,6%

          Credit Provisions Reserve / Customer Loans (Gross)                      4,23%       5,34%

          Cost of Risk(6)                                                         1,17%       1,62%

          PRODUCTIVITY/EFFICIENCY

          Operating Costs / Total Assets (%)                                      1,15%       1,18%

          Assets per Employee (€,000)                                              9 996       9 832

          Total Cost to Income (%)                                                57,9%       44,6%

          Cost to Income (ex-markets) (%)                                         57,3%       57,2%

          The following table sets out a summary of the financial information for the Group on a
          consolidated basis for the three months ended 31st March 2013. This financial information
          was extracted without material adjustment from the consolidated financial statements of the
          Group for the three months ended 31st march 2013.

                                                               31 March,     31 March,
                        MAIN INDICATORS                           2013          2012        Change

          ACTIVITY (euro million)

          Total Assets(1)                                          98 659        97 345        1.3%

          Net Assets                                               84 946        81 265        4.5%

          Gross Loans                                              51 267        50 984        0.6%

          Customer Deposits                                        37 417        35 959        4.1%

          Core Capital - BoP                                        6 510          6 066       7.3%

          Core Capital - EBA                                        6 089              -           -

          SOLVENCY

          Solvency Ratio(2)

          - CORE TIER I - BoP                                      10.5%           9.4%       1.1 pp


                                                15
Element   Title

          - CORE TIER I - EBA                                                            9.9%                      -             -

          - TIER I                                                                     10.4%                   9.6%           0.8 pp

          - TOTAL                                                                      11.2%                  10.8%           0.4 pp

          LIQUIDITY (euro million)

          ECB funds (net)(3)                                                             7877                 12 108     - 4 231

          Repoable Asstes                                                              25 435                 24 231          1 204

          Loan/deposits ratio(4) (%)                                                    129%                  135%             -6 pp

          ASSET QUALITY

          Overdue loans + 90 days / Gross loans                                        4.34%                  2.96%      1.38 pp

          Coverage of Overdue Loans + 90 days                                         126.8%              150.3%        -23.5 pp

          Credit at Risk                                                              10.10%                  7.15%      2.95 pp

          Provisions for Credit / Gross loans                                          5.51%                  4.45%      1.06 pp

          Cost of risk(5)                                                              1.46%                  1.17%      0.29 pp

          RESULTS & PROFITABILITY

          Net income (EUR mn)                                                            -62.0                  11.6           ….

          ROE(6)                                                                      -3.53%                  0.51%     -4.04 pp

          ROA                                                                         -0.30%                  0.06%     -0.36 pp

          EFFICIENCY

          Cost to Income                                                               61.8%                  51.4%      10.4 pp

          Cost to Income (ex markets)                                                  71.3%                  54.3%      17.0 pp

          BRANCH NETWORK

          Retail Network                                                                   769                  789            -20

          - Domestic                                                                       659                  686            -27

          - International                                                                  110                  103              7
          (1)      Net Assets + Asset Management + Other off-balance sheet liabilities + Securitised Credit
          (2)      Accroding to IRB Foundation; preliminary March 2013 data
          (3)      Includes funds from and placements with the ECB System; positive = net borrowing; negative = net lending




                                                          16
Element   Title
          (4)     Ratio calculated according to BoP definition for the Funding & Capital Plan
          (5)     P&L provisions / Gross Loans
          (6)     Annualised Net Income


          Statements of no significant change

          There has been no significant change in the financial or trading position of BES or the Group
          since 31st March 2013, the last day of the financial period in respect of which the most
          recent financial statements of BES and the Group have been prepared.

          There has been no significant change in the financial or trading position of BES Finance
          since 31st December 2012, the last day of the financial period in respect of which the most
          recent financial statements of BES Finance have been prepared.

          Statements of no material adverse change

          There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of BES or the Group since 31st
          December 2012, the last day of the financial period in respect of which the most recently
          audited financial statements of BES and the Group have been prepared.

          There has been no material adverse change in the prospects of BES Finance since 31st
          December 2012, the last day of the financial period in respect of which the most recently
          audited financial statements of BES Finance have been prepared.

B.13      Events      impacting           the     Not Applicable - There are no recent events particular to the
          Issuer's solvency                       relevant Issuer which are to a material extent relevant to the
                                                  evaluation of the relevant Issuer's solvency.

B.14      Dependence upon              other      See Element B.5. BES is the parent company of the Group
          group entities                          and the holding company of all the companies in the Group.
                                                  BES Finance is a wholly-owned subsidiary of BES.
                                                  Through its shareholding, BES directly controls BES
                                                  Finance. There are no other measures in place concerning
                                                  such control.

B.15      Principal activities                    The Group’s products and services include deposits, loans
                                                  to individual and corporate customers, asset management,
                                                  brokerage and custodian services, investment banking
                                                  services and the distribution of life and non-life insurance
                                                  products.

                                                  The Group reports on the basis of the following operational
                                                  segments:

                                                       Domestic Commercial Banking – providing all banking
                                                        services to Portuguese private and corporate customers
                                                        through branch network, corporate centres and other
                                                        channels;

                                                       International Commercial Banking – providing banking



                                                         17
Element   Title
                      services to private and corporate customers through
                      retail units located abroad;

                     Investment Banking – providing consulting services,
                      brokerage and other investment banking services to
                      corporate and institutional customers

                     Asset Management – providing asset management
                      services covering mutual funds, real estate funds and
                      pension funds and providing discretionary and portfolio
                      management services;

                     Life Insurance – providing investment insurance and
                      retirement plans to BES customers; and

                     Capital Markets and Strategic Investments – overseeing
                      global financial management activity of the Group
                      including raising and placing funds in the financial
                      markets, investment and risk management of credit,
                      interest rate, equities etc. and activities with non-
                      resident institutional investors.

                  BES Finance

                  Pursuant to article 3 of its articles of association, the objects
                  of BES Finance are, inter alia, the following:

                     carrying on the business of a finance and investment
                      company;

                     receiving monies on deposit, receiving loans and
                      borrowing or raising money in any currency, with or
                      without security and in particular, but without
                      limitation, by the issue of notes or bonds;

                     advancing, depositing or lending money, securities
                      and/or property;

                     buying, selling, acting as broker and dealing in foreign
                      exchange, bullion, specie, precious metals and minerals,
                      and all other commodities;

                     entering into currency and/or interest rate swaps and
                      any other type of swap agreements;

                     acting as promoters and entrepreneurs:

                     exercising and enforcing all rights and powers
                      conferred by or incidental to the ownership of any
                      shares, stock, obligations or other securities;




                       18
Element   Title

                                          purchasing or otherwise acquiring, selling, exchanging,
                                           surrendering, leasing, mortgaging, charging, converting,
                                           turning to account, disposing of and dealing with real
                                           and personal property and rights of all kinds;

                                          standing surety for or guaranteeing, supporting or
                                           securing the performance of all or any of the obligations
                                           of any person, firm or company whether or not related
                                           or affiliated to it in any manner; and

                                          engaging in or carrying on any other lawful trade,
                                           business or enterprise.

B.16      Controlling shareholders     The sole direct shareholder of BES Finance is BES. BES is,
                                       directly or indirectly, also the holding company of all the
                                       companies in the Group.

                                       BESPAR, which holds the interests of Espirito Santo
                                       Financial Group, S.A. and an indirect stake in Crédit
                                       Agricole, owned 35.3 per cent. of BES as of 31st December,
                                       2012. Crédit Agricole, has a direct holding of 10.81 per
                                       cent. in BES.

B.17      Credit ratings               There have been no credit ratings assigned to BES Finance.

                                       BES has been rated BB- by Standard & Poor's Credit
                                       Market Services Europe Limited ("S&P"), Ba3 by Moody's
                                       Investors Service España, S.A. ("Moody's") and BBB (low)
                                       by DBRS, Inc. ("DBRS").

                                       Each of Moody’s, S&P and DBRS is established in the
                                       European Union and is registered under Regulation (EC)
                                       No. 1060/2009 (as amended).

                                       [The Notes to be issued [have been/are expected to be] rated
                                        by .]

                                       A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or
                                       hold securities and may be subject to suspension, reduction
                                       or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating agency.

                                       [Not Applicable - No ratings have been assigned to the
                                       Issuer or its debt securities at the request of or with the
                                       co-operation of the Issuer in the rating process.]

B.18      Description      of    the   The payment of the principal of, and interest on, the Notes
          Guarantee                    issued by BES Finance will be unconditionally and
                                       irrevocably guaranteed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.,
                                       acting through its London branch (the "Guarantor"). The
                                       obligations of the Guarantor under its guarantee will:



                                           19
Element        Title

                                                   in the case of Senior Notes, constitute direct,
                                                    unconditional,    unsecured      and     unsubordinated
                                                    obligations of the Guarantor and will rank pari passu
                                                    with all present and future unsecured (subject to the
                                                    provisions of the Guarantor’s negative pledge) and
                                                    unsubordinated obligations (including those arising
                                                    under deposits received in its banking business) of the
                                                    Guarantor, except for obligations given priority by law;

                                                   in the case of Subordinated Notes, constitute direct,
                                                    unsecured obligations of the Guarantor but, in the event
                                                    of dissolution or liquidation of the Guarantor,
                                                    subordinated in right of payment to the claims of
                                                    depositors and other unsecured creditors of the
                                                    Guarantor (other than creditors in respect of
                                                    indebtedness which is subordinated to at least the same
                                                    extent as the obligations of the Guarantor under its
                                                    guarantee in respect of the Subordinated Notes).

B.19           Information       about   the    BES may be an Issuer or the Guarantor of Notes under the
               Guarantor                        Programme.

                                                Information relating to BES is set out in this Section B.

Section C – Securities



Element        Title

C.1            Description of Notes/ISIN        [The Notes described in this section are debt securities with
                                                a denomination of less than €100,000 (or its equivalent in
                                                any other currency).]

                                                The Notes are [£/€/U.S.$/CHF/JPY/]  [ per
                                                cent./Floating Rate/Zero Coupon/[Reset]] Notes due .

                                                The International Securities Identification Number (ISIN)
                                                is .

                                                [The Common Code is .]

C.2            Currency                         The currency of this Series of Notes is [Pounds Sterling
                                                (£)/Euro   (€)/U.S.   dollars   (U.S.$)/Swiss    Francs
                                                (CHF)/Japanese Yen (JPY)/].

C.5            Restrictions                on   Not Applicable - There are no restrictions on free
               transferability                  transferability of the Notes

C.8            Rights attached to the Notes,    Status and Subordination



                                                     20
Element   Title
          including     ranking     and
          limitations on those rights     Notes are issued on a [senior]/[subordinated] basis referred
                                          to as [the Senior Notes]/[the Subordinated Notes].

                                          [Senior      Notes    constitute    direct,   unconditional,
                                          unsubordinated and (subject to the provisions of the Issuer's
                                          negative pledge below) unsecured obligations of the Issuer
                                          and will rank pari passu among themselves and (save for
                                          certain obligations required to be preferred by law) equally
                                          with all other unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of
                                          the Issuer, from time to time outstanding.]

                                          [Payments in respect of any Suborindated Notes issued on a
                                          subordinated basis constitute direct, unsecured and
                                          subordinated obligations of the Issuer and will rank pari
                                          passu among themselves and (save for certain obligations
                                          required to be preferred by law) at least pari passu with all
                                          other subordinated obligations of the Issuer. Without
                                          prejudice to the foregoing, the Subordinated Notes will, in
                                          the event of a distribution of the assets in the dissolution or
                                          liquidation of the Issuer, rank senior to the share capital of
                                          the Issuer.]

                                          Issuer's negative pledge

                                          [The terms of the Senior Notes will contain a negative
                                          pledge provision to the effect that, so long as any Senior
                                          Note remains outstanding, [neither] the Issuer [nor the
                                          Guarantor (where the Issuer is BES Finance)] will [not],
                                          create or permit to subsist any mortgage, charge, pledge,
                                          lien or other encumbrance or security interest upon the
                                          whole or any part of its undertakings or assets, to secure
                                          any borrowings of the Issuer having an original maturity of
                                          more than one year represented by bonds, notes, debentures
                                          or other securities which are, subject to certain specified
                                          exceptions, either listed or traded on any non-Portuguese
                                          domestic stock exchange or in any securities market or are
                                          initially offered outside the Portuguese Republic in more
                                          than a specified percentage, or any guarantee or indemnity
                                          given in respect thereof, without at the same time or
                                          promptly securing the Notes equally and rateably therewith
                                          or providing other security for the Notes as the Trustee
                                          shall in its absolute discretion deem not materially less
                                          beneficial to the interests of the holders of Senior Notes or
                                          as shall be approved by an extraordinary resolution of the
                                          holders of Senior Notes.]

                                          [The Subordinated Notes do not contain a negative pledge.]

                                          Events of default



                                              21
Element   Title

                  [The terms of the Senior Notes will contain, amongst
                  others, the following events of default:

                  (a) default in payment of any principal or interest due in
                      respect of the Senior Notes, continuing for a specified
                      period of time;

                  (b) non-performance or non-observance by the Issuer [or
                      the Guarantor (if the Issuer is BES Finance)] of any of
                      its other obligations under the conditions of the Senior
                      Notes or the Trust Deed, in certain cases continuing
                      for a specified period of time;

                  (c) acceleration by reason of default of the repayment of
                      any indebtedness or default in any payment of any
                      indebtedness or in the honouring of any guarantee or
                      indemnity in respect of any indebtedness by the Issuer
                      [or the Guarantor (if the Issuer is BES Finance)], in
                      any case so long as any such indebtedness exceeds the
                      specified threshold;

                  (d) order made by any competent court or resolution
                      passed for winding up or dissolution of the Issuer [or
                      the Guarantor (where the Issuer is BES Finance)]
                      (other than for an amalgamation, merger or
                      reconstruction approved by the Trustee or an
                      extraordinary resolution of the holders of Interbolsa
                      Notes);

                  (e) save for the purposes of reorganisation approved by
                      the Trustee or an extraordinary resolution of the
                      holders of Interbolsa Notes, the Issuer [or the
                      Guarantor (where the Issuer is BES Finance)] cease to
                      carry on the whole or substantially the whole of its
                      business;

                  (f) events relating to the winding-up or dissolution of the
                      Issuer [or the Guarantor (as the case may be)];

                  (g) [BES Finance ceases to be a wholly owned and
                      controlled subsidiary of BES (except where BES
                      Finance has been substituted as the principal debtor)];
                      [and

                  (h) (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the Guarantee
                      ceases to be in full force and effect].]

                  [The terms of the Subordinated Notes will contain, amongst
                  others, the following events of default:

                  (a)   default in payment of any principal or interest due in

                        22
Element   Title
                       respect of the Subordinated Notes, continuing for a
                       specified period of time; and

                  (b) order made by any competent court or resolution
                      passed for winding up or dissolution of the Issuer [or
                      the Guarantor (where the Issuer is BES Finance)]
                      (other than for an amalgamation, merger or
                      reconstruction approved by the Trustee or an
                      extraordinary resolution of the holders of
                      Subordinated Notes).]

                  Taxation

                  All payments in respect of Notes will be made without
                  deduction for or on account of withholding taxes imposed
                  by [the Cayman Islands (in the case of payments by BES
                  Finance)]/[Portugal (in the case of payments by BES)] or
                  any authority thereof or therein having power to tax, unless
                  required by law. In the event that any such deduction is
                  made, the Issuer [or, as the case may be, the Guarantor]
                  will, save in certain limited circumstances, be required to
                  pay additional amounts to cover the amounts so deducted.

                  All payments in respect of the Notes will be subject in all
                  cases to (i) any fiscal or other laws and regulations
                  applicable thereto in the place of payment and (ii) any
                  withholding or deduction required pursuant to an agreement
                  described in Section 1471(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue
                  Code of 1986 (the “Code”) or otherwise imposed pursuant
                  to Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code, any regulations
                  or agreements thereunder, official interpretations thereof, or
                  any law implementing an intergovernmental approach
                  thereto.

                  Meetings

                  The terms of the Notes will contain provisions for calling
                  meetings of holders of such Notes to consider matters
                  affecting their interests generally. These provisions permit
                  defined majorities to bind all holders, including holders
                  who did not attend and vote at the relevant meeting and
                  holders who voted in a manner contrary to the majority.

                  Governing law

                  Bearer Notes (and any non-contractual obligations arising
                  out of or in connection with it) are governed by English
                  law, except that the conditions relating to (i) the status of
                  the Subordinated Notes where BES acts in its capacity as
                  issuer or guarantor and (ii) the status of the guarantee in
                  relation to the Subordinated Notes, shall be governed by


                      23
Element   Title
                                          Portuguese law.

                                          Notes held through Interbolsa - Sociedade Gestora de
                                          Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados de
                                          Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa Notes”) are
                                          governed by Portuguese law.

C.9       Interest/Redemption             Interest
          including:
                                          [The Notes bear interest [from their date of issue/from ] at
          the nominal interest rate       the fixed rate of  per cent. per annum. The yield of the
                                          Notes is  per cent. Interest will be paid [annually/semi-
          the date from which interest    annually/quarterly/monthly] in arrear on  [and ] in each
          becomes payable and the         [year/month] [, subject to adjustment for non-business
          due dates for interest          days]. The first interest payment will be made on .]

          where the rate is not fixed,    [The Notes bear interest [from their date of issue/from ] at
          description of the underlying   floating rates calculated by reference to  month
          on which it is based            [[currency] LIBOR/EURIBOR [plus/minus] a margin of 
                                          per cent.       Interest will be paid [annually/semi-
                                          annually/quarterly/monthly] in arrear on  [and ] in each
                                          [year/month], subject to adjustment for non-business days.
                                          The first interest payment will be made on the interest
                                          payment date falling in .]

                                          [The Notes bear interest (a) [from their date of issue] to the
                                          first Reset Date occurring thereafter at an initial fixed rate
                                          of  per cent. per annum; and (b) in respect of each
                                          successive -year period thereafter, at a rate per annum
                                          equal to the sum of  and a margin of  per cent., in each
                                          case, payable [annually/semi-annually/quarterly/monthly]
                                          in arrear on  [and ] in each [year/month].]

                                           [The Notes do not bear any interest [and will be offered
                                          and sold at a discount to their nominal amount].]

          Redemption        including
          maturity     date      and
          arrangements    for     the     Subject to any purchase and cancellation or early
          amortisation of the loan,       redemption, the Notes will be redeemed on  at [par/ per
          including the repayment         cent. of their nominal amount].
          procedures
                                          The Notes may be redeemed early for tax reasons at  per
                                          cent. of the nominal amount of the Notes. [The Notes may
                                          also be redeemed before the maturity date at the option of
                                          [the Issuer ([either in whole or in part] / [in whole only])
                                          [and/or] [the holders of the Notes] at [100 per cent. of the
                                          nominal amount of the Notes / ] on  [and .]

          Indication of yield             [The yield on the Notes is  per cent. per annum. The yield
                                          is calculated at the issue date of the Notes on the basis of


                                              24
Element       Title
                                            the issue price of the Notes of  per cent. It is not an
                                            indication of future yield.]

              Representative of holders     The Issuer has appointed The Bank of New York Mellon
                                            (the Trustee) to act as trustee for the holders of Notes
                                            (other than Interbolsa Notes). The trustee may, without the
                                            consent of any holders and without regard to the interests of
                                            particular holders, agree to (i) any modification of, or to the
                                            waiver or authorisation of any breach or proposed breach
                                            of, any of the provisions of the Notes or (ii) determine
                                            without the consent of any holders that an event of default
                                            or potential event of default shall not be treated as such or
                                            (iii) the substitution of another company as principal debtor
                                            under the Notes in place of the relevant Issuer.

                                            The Issuer has appointed Vieira de Almeida & Associados -
                                            Sociedade de Advogados R.L., as common representative
                                            of the holders of Interbolsa Notes (representante comum
                                            dos obrigacionistas).

                                            Please also refer to Element C.8

C.10          Derivative component in the   See Element C.9. Not applicable – There is no derivative
              interest payments             component in the interest payments.

C.11          Listing and Admission to      [Application [has been][is expected to be] made by the
              trading in respect of Notes   Issuer (or on its behalf) for the Notes to be admitted to
              with a denomination of less   trading    on     the     regulated     market    of   the
              than EUR100,000 (or its       [London/Luxembourg/ Stock Exchange.] [The Notes are
              equivalent     in     other   not intended to be admitted to trading on any market.]
              currencies)



Section D – Risks



Element       Title

D.2           Key risks regarding the       In purchasing Notes, investors assume the risk that the
              Issuer and the Guarantor      Issuer [and the Guarantor] may become insolvent or
                                            otherwise be unable to make all payments due in respect of
                                            the Notes. There is a wide range of factors which
                                            individually or together could result in the Issuer [and the
                                            Guarantor] becoming unable to make all payments due in
                                            respect of the Notes. It is not possible to identify all such
                                            factors or to determine which factors are most likely to
                                            occur, as the Issuer and [the Guarantor] may not be aware
                                            of all relevant factors and certain factors which [it/they]
                                            currently deem[s] not to be material may become material


                                                25
Element   Title
                  as a result of the occurrence of events outside the Issuer's
                  [and the Guarantor's] control.       The Issuer [and the
                  Guarantor] [has/have] identified a number of factors which
                  could materially adversely affect [its/their] businesses and
                  ability to make payments due under the Notes. These
                  factors include:

                      [the Group’s performance, results of operations and
                       financial conditions are dependent on the strength of
                       the Portuguese economy and, to a lesser extent, that of
                       the European Union and that of those countries
                       outside of the EU where the Group operates. The
                       Group’s businesses are being and may continue to be
                       negatively affected by current local and global
                       economic conditions and adverse perceptions of
                       those conditions and future economic prospects;

                      conditions in the global financial markets and the
                       macroeconomic context of the countries in which the
                       Group operates generally influence the performance
                       of the Group. Intense competition in all areas of the
                       Group’s operation can also have an adverse effect on
                       the relevant Issuer’s operating results;

                      the Group’s international operations are exposed to
                       the risk of adverse political, governmental or
                       economic developments in the countries in which it
                       operates;

                      the Group is subject to the risk of interest rate
                       fluctuations, risk of changes in credit quality and the
                       repayment of loans and amounts due from borrowers
                       and counterparties, risk of possible losses resulting
                       from an adverse change in the value of financial
                       instruments due to fluctuations in interest rates,
                       foreign exchange rates, share prices or commodity
                       prices, inability to anticipate and provide for
                       unforeseen decreases or changes in funding sources
                       and risk of losses or of a negative impact upon its
                       relationship with other stakeholders resulting from
                       inadequate or negligent application of internal
                       procedures, or from information systems, non-
                       compliance with regulations in force or legal action,
                       all of which may from time to time impact negatively
                       upon the Group’s operating results;

                      although BES has implemented risk management
                       policies for each of the risks that it is exposed to, such
                       policies may not be fully effective;

                      because of the Group's dependence on sophisticated


                      26
Element   Title
                                         IT systems, which are vulnerable to a number of
                                         problems and require frequent updates, any
                                         significant interruption to the Group’s IT systems can
                                         have an adverse effect on the activities, the results and
                                         the financial condition of the Group;

                                        the success of the Group depends largely on its ability
                                         to maintain its client portfolio and provide it with a
                                         diversified range of competitive and high quality
                                         products and services and the potential inability of
                                         BES to do so could have an adverse effect on the
                                         Group’s financial situation and results;

                                        the Group operates in a highly regulated industry and
                                         the regulatory laws governing the activity of the
                                         Group may change at any time in ways which may
                                         have an adverse effect on its business; and

                                        the major shareholders of BES (Espírito Santo
                                         Financial Group S.A. and Crédit Agricole S.A.) hold
                                         a majority of the voting rights of BES and, as such,
                                         have the ability to exercise significant influence over
                                         or determine the outcome of certain shareholder
                                         actions.]

                                    [BES Finance is a funding vehicle of the Group. Therefore,
                                    any failure by BES to pay amounts outstanding under any
                                    intra-group loans made by BES Finance to BES would
                                    affect BES Finance’s ability to meet its payment obligations
                                    under the issued Notes.]

D.3       Key risks regarding the   There are also risks associated with the Notes. These
          Notes                     include a range of market risks (including that there may be
                                    no or only a limited secondary market in the Notes and
                                    therefore, holders of Notes may not be able to sell their
                                    Notes easily or at prices that will provide them with a yield
                                    comparable with similar investments that have a developed
                                    secondary market, that an optional redemption feature is
                                    likely to limit the secondary market value of the Notes such
                                    that the secondary market value of such Notes will not rise
                                    substantially above the price at which they can be
                                    redeemed, that the relevant Issuer’s ability to convert the
                                    interest rate on Notes from a fixed rate to a floating rate (or
                                    vice versa) will affect the secondary market value of such
                                    Notes since the relevant Issuer may be expected to convert
                                    the rate when it is likely to produce a lower overall cost of
                                    borrowing and to a rate which is lower than other
                                    comparable fixed or floating rate notes (as applicable), that
                                    the secondary market value of Notes issued at a substantial
                                    discount or premium to their nominal amount tend to
                                    fluctuate more in relation to general changes in interest


                                        27
Element       Title
                                rates than do prices for conventional interest-bearing Notes,
                                that the value of an investor's investment may be adversely
                                affected by exchange rate movements where the Notes are
                                not denominated in the investor's own currency, that any
                                credit rating assigned to the Notes may not adequately
                                reflect all the risks associated with an investment in the
                                Notes and that changes in interest rates will affect the value
                                of Notes which bear interest at a fixed rate), the relevant
                                Issuer’s (and, if applicable, the Guarantor’s) obligations
                                under Subordinated Notes are subordinated and will rank
                                junior in priority to the claims of Senior Creditors.
                                Although Subordinated Notes may pay a higher rate of
                                interest than comparable Notes which are not subordinated,
                                there is a real risk that a holder of a Subordinated Note will
                                lose some or all of their investment should the relevant
                                Issuer and, if applicable, the Guarantor becomes insolvent,
                                the fact that the conditions of the Notes may be modified
                                without the consent of the holder in certain circumstances,
                                that the holder may not receive payment of the full amounts
                                due in respect of the Notes as a result of amounts being
                                withheld by the relevant Issuer in order to comply with
                                applicable law and that investors are exposed to the risk of
                                changes in law or regulation affecting the value of Notes
                                held by them.

                                “Senior Creditors” means creditors of the relevant Issuer
                                or, as the case may be, the Guarantor who (x) are depositors
                                or other unsubordinated creditors of the relevant Issuer or,
                                as the case may be, the Guarantor or (y) are subordinated
                                creditors of the relevant Issuer or, as the case may be, the
                                Guarantor other than those whose claims rank pari passu
                                with or junior to the claims of the holders of Subordinated
                                Notes or (in respect of the Guarantor) persons entitled to
                                claim under the Guarantee in respect of such Notes.

                                Interbolsa Notes will be subject to Interbolsa procedures
                                and Portuguese law with respect to the form and transfer of
                                Interbolsa Notes, payments on Interbolsa Notes and
                                Portuguese tax rules. Holders of Interbolsa Notes must
                                ensure that they comply with all procedures to ensure that
                                they receive the correct tax treatment in relation to their
                                Interbolsa Notes.

Section E – Offer



Element       Title

E.2b          Use of proceeds   [The net proceeds from the issue of Notes will be applied by
                                the Issuer for general financing requirements in the Issuer's


                                    28
Element   Title
                                         general corporate purposes, which include making a profit
                                         [and[ ]].]

E.3       Terms and conditions of the [This issue of Notes is being offered in a Non-Exempt Offer
          offer                       in [specify particular country/ies].
                                         The issue price of the Notes is  per cent. of their nominal
                                         amount.

                                         Offer Price:                       [Not Applicable/[    ]]

                                         Conditions to which the offer is [Not Applicable/[      ]]
                                         subject:

                                         Description of the application [Not Applicable/[        ]]
                                         process:

                                         Details of the minimum and/or [Not Applicable/[         ]]
                                         maximum amount of application
                                         (whether      in   numbers     of
                                         securities or aggregate amount to
                                         invest):

                                         Description of possibility to [Not Applicable/[         ]]
                                         reduce subscriptions and manner
                                         for refunding excess amount
                                         paid by applicants:

                                         Details of the method and time [Not Applicable/[        ]]
                                         limits for paying up and
                                         delivering the Notes:

                                         Full description of the manner [Not Applicable/[        ]]
                                         and date on which results of the
                                         offer are to be made to public:

                                         Procedure for exercise of any [Not Applicable/[         ]]
                                         right       of       pre-emption,
                                         negotiability of subscription
                                         rights    and     treatment     of
                                         subscription rights not exercised:

                                         Process for notification to [Not Applicable/[           ]]
                                         applicants of the amount of
                                         Notes allotted and indication
                                         whether dealing may begin
                                         before notification is made:

                                         Details of any tranche(s) [Not Applicable/[             ]]
                                         reserved for specific country:

                                         Amount of any expenses and [Not Applicable/[            ]]


                                             29
Element   Title
                                          taxes specifically charged to the
                                          subscriber or purchaser:

                                          Procedure for exercise of any [Not Applicable/[        ]]
                                          right       of       pre-emption,
                                          negotiability of subscription
                                          rights    and     treatment     of
                                          subscription rights not exercised:

                                          Name(s) and address(es), to the [None/[       ]]
                                          extent known to the Issuer, of
                                          the placers in the various
                                          countries where the offer takes
                                          place

E.4       Interest of natural and legal [The Dealers have been paid fees in relation to the issue of
          persons involved in the Notes under the Programme.] [Any such Dealer and its
          issue/offer                   affiliates have engaged, and may in the future engage, in
                                        investment banking and/or commercial banking transactions
                                        with, and may perform other services for, the Issuer [and
                                        the Guarantor] and [its/their] affiliates in the ordinary
                                        course of business.]

                                          [Other than as mentioned above,[ and save for ,] so far as
                                          the Issuer is aware, no person involved in the issue of the
                                          Notes has an interest material to the offer, including
                                          conflicting interests.]

E.7       Expenses charged to the [Not Applicable – No expenses will be charged to investors
          investor by the Issuer or an by the relevant Issuer.]
          Offeror
                                       [No expenses are being charged to an investor by the Issuer.
                                       For this specific issue, however, expenses may be charged
                                       by an Authorised Offeror (as defined above) in the range
                                       between  per cent. and  per cent. of the nominal amount
                                       of the Notes to be purchased by the relevant investor.]




                                              30
                                              RISK FACTORS

In purchasing Notes, investors assume the risk that the Bank and/or BES Finance may become insolvent or
otherwise be unable to make all payments due in respect of the Notes. There is a wide range of factors
which individually or together could result in the Bank and/or BES Finance becoming unable to make all
payments due in respect of the Notes. It is not possible to identify all such factors or to determine which
factors are most likely to occur, as the Bank and/or BES Finance may not be aware of all relevant factors
and certain factors which it currently deems not to be material may become material as a result of the
occurrence of events outside the Bank’s and/or BES Finance's control. The Bank and/or BES Finance has
identified in this Prospectus a number of factors which could materially adversely affect its business and
ability to make payments due under the Notes. In addition, factors which are material for the purpose of
assessing the market risks associated with Notes issued under the Programme are also described below.

Prospective investors should also read the detailed information set out elsewhere in this Prospectus and reach
their own views prior to making any investment decision.

1.      Factors that may affect BES’ ability to fulfil its obligations under Notes to be issued by BES
        under the Programme or guaranteed by BES under the Deed of Guarantee

1.1     Economic Environment

        As a financial group whose core business is banking (taking deposits and using them to grant loans)
        in Portugal, the state of the Portuguese economy affects the performance of the BES Group (BES
        together with its consolidated subsidiaries). For the year ended 31st December, 2012, 71 per cent. of
        the BES Group’s net assets and 75 per cent. of operating income derived from its activities in
        Portugal (as at and for the year ended 31st December, 2011: 74 per cent. and 51 per cent.,
        respectively). Consequently, the BES Group is particularly exposed to the macroeconomic
        conditions which affect growth, particularly in the Portuguese market.

        Portugal’s gross domestic product (“GDP”) stagnated in 2008, experienced a contraction of 2.9 per
        cent. in 2009 and grew 1.9 per cent. in 2010. In 2010, the Portuguese public deficit represented 9.8
        per cent. of Portugal’s GDP and national public debt amounted to 94 per cent. of GDP in 2010.
        Unemployment grew from 9.5 per cent. in 2009 to 10.8 per cent. at the end of 2010.

        As a result of deteriorating economic conditions, the Portuguese government requested financial
        assistance from the Member States of the European Union (the “EU”) through the European
        Financial Stability Facility (the “EFSF”) and the International Monetary Fund (the “IMF”) in April
        2011. On 5th May, 2011, the Portuguese government, with the support of the main Portuguese
        political parties, agreed to an economic and financial stabilisation programme jointly provided by the
        IMF and the EU (the “Stabilisation Programme”). The Stabilisation Programme is expected to
        provide significant financial support of €78 billion over a three-year period in the form of a co-
        operative package of IMF and EU funding, including a €26 billion three-year loan under the IMF’s
        extended fund facility, with the remaining €52 billion in funding being provided by the EU at an
        interest rate expected to be between 3.5 per cent. and 4 per cent. On 10th May, 2011, the European
        Commission approved the Stabilisation Programme and, on 16th May, 2011, EU finance ministers
        approved the Stabilisation Programme. The availability of the funding is dependent on the
        implementation of budgetary and structural measures by the Portuguese government, which will be
        subject to quarterly reviews by the EU and the IMF for the duration of the Stabilisation Programme.

        As part of the Stabilisation Programme, the Portuguese government has committed to implement
        measures to decrease expenses and increase revenues that, subject to certain assumptions, were
        initially intended to reduce the general government deficit to a level of approximately 5.9 per cent. of


                                                      31
GDP in 2011, to approximately 5.4 per cent. of GDP in 2012 and approximately 3.0 per cent. of
GDP in 2013.

In addition, the Stabilisation Programme is intended to put the Portuguese public debt to GDP ratio
on a downward path from 2013 and maintain fiscal consolidation over the medium-term up to a
balanced budgetary position, principally by containing growth in expenditure and by supporting
competitiveness through a budget-neutral adjustment to the tax structure. The Stabilisation
Programme contains structural measures and policy guidelines designed to boost the country’s
competitiveness and improve Portugal’s growth rates in the medium term with a view to repaying
the country’s large debt burden. Specifically, the Stabilisation Programme includes, among others,
measures intended to:

       Increase revenues, in part through the increase of tax rates for goods and services;

       Improve the flexibility of the labour market;

       Reduce the level of pensions for certain government employees; and

       Improve the competitiveness of the Portuguese economy.

The implementation of the required measures is subject to the continued commitment of the
Portuguese government. Changes in the government or government policy, including as a result of
rescue plans elsewhere in Europe, could have an impact on the timing and scope of the structural
reforms that Portugal has to implement in order to meet the conditions of the Stabilisation
Programme. Furthermore, implementation of these structural reforms may meet considerable
opposition from labour unions and the general public in Portugal, which could put pressure on the
Portuguese government’s ability to meet the requirements of such measures in the future. In
addition, European politics (including national elections in EU Member States) may affect the
availability of funding for Portugal and other European countries.

The outlook for the Portuguese economy is conditioned by the implementation of the Stabilisation
Programme. The need to reduce the public deficit in 2012 translated into the adoption of a very
restrictive fiscal policy, with negative impacts on economic activity in the near term. At the same
time, the private sector - corporate, financial and households - continued its deleveraging process.
Under these circumstances, GDP contracted by 3.2 per cent. in 2012, after having contracted 1.6 per
cent. in 2011 (source: Portuguese National Statistical Institute). This will be mainly associated with a
significant contraction in domestic demand, of around 12 per cent. in real and accumulated terms in
these two years (source: Portuguese National Statistical Institute). Albeit slowing down, exports
have posted relatively strong growth while imports have fallen significantly, in line with domestic
demand. The Portuguese economy is expected to contract by 2.3 per cent. in 2013, mainly due to the
contraction of domestic demand (source: Portuguese Ministry of Finance).

Factors such as higher unemployment, lower disposable incomes, and a shift in consumption from
higher to lower taxed products and services have had an impact on revenue collection. The fiscal
deficit reached 4.9 per cent. of GDP in 2012. The statistical treatment of specific transactions, such
as the airport concession (ANA), resulted however in a higher headline deficit of 7.4 per cent. of
GDP. While the government is committed to keep a spending path broadly consistent with structural
fiscal adjustment, less growth and higher unemployment will reduce revenues and increase social
benefits. To allow the operation of automatic fiscal stabilizers, in March 2013 the Portuguese
government requested the International Monetary Fund, the European Commission and the European
Central Bank (the “Troika”) to revise the deficit targets from 4.5 per cent. to 5.5 per cent. of GDP in
2013, and from 2.5 per cent. to 4 per cent. of GDP in 2014. The 2015 deficit target, set at 2.5 per
cent. of GDP, will be below the 3 per cent. deficit threshold of the Stability and Growth Pact.


                                              32
The new deficit targets are expected to be underpinned by a permanent, targeted, spending-based
consolidation effort. The Portuguese government undertook a thorough and transparent review of
public expenditures to identify potential savings necessary to meet the deficit targets in the period.
These measures aim at rationalizing and modernizing public administration, improving the
sustainability of the pension system, and achieving additional cost savings across ministries. Public
sector reforms will continue to strengthen financial management, fight tax evasion, restructure state
enterprises, and reduce costs of public-private partnerships.

However, there are various factors which may hinder the achievement of the targets. The target for
2013 is underpinned by a range of measures in the 2013 budget amounting to more than 3 per cent.
of GDP. These include, in relation to expenditure, further cuts in compensations of employees; a
reduction in social benefits and subsidies including for the health care sector; curtailing intermediate
consumption; and cuts in investment. In relation to revenue, the budget foresees a restructuring of
the personal income tax that reduces the number of bands, increases in the average tax rate and curbs
tax benefits; a surcharge on taxable income above the minimum wage; a solidarity surcharge on the
highest incomes; a limit on the deductibility of interest costs from corporate taxes; and a reduction in
the threshold for the highest surcharge on profits. Overall about 80 per cent. of the fiscal adjustment
in 2013 will come from the revenue side. The Constitutional Court’s rejection of some of the
measures included in the 2013 budget has forced the adoption of alternative fiscal consolidation
measures for this year (namely expenditure cuts). If the Constitutional Court rejects some of the
measures to be included in the 2014 Budget, the need to adopt alternative measures to compensate
that revenue shortfall could arise.

Meanwhile, the seventh assessment of the adjustment programme by the Troika in March 2013 was
favourable, allowing the release of a further tranche of external assistance of €2 billion in total.
Portugal has already received €64.5 billion out of a total of €78 billion of official assistance under
the Stabilisation Programme, as reported by the IMF.

The principal risks to the Portuguese domestic outlook stem from the possibility of further
deterioration in macroeconomic conditions outside of Portugal, particularly in Europe in light of the
continuing recession in the Euro Zone. Although slowing down, Portuguese exports have maintained
some strength and an increasing proportion of exports to emerging markets in Africa, Latin America
and Asia are growing in significance. However, a worse than expected performance in the Euro Zone
may well lead to a steeper fall in Portuguese GDP in 2013. The stabilisation of the financial situation
of the Euro Zone is therefore critical to any stabilisation in Portugal. The ongoing deleveraging
process in the Portuguese economy has already led to a decrease in the external deficit of 9 per cent.
of GDP at the end of 2010 to 5.1 per cent. at the end of 2011. This path continued in 2012, with the
current and capital balance reaching a surplus of 0.4 per cent. of GDP at the end of 2012 (source:
Portuguese National statistical Institute).

The continuously weak macroeconomic conditions in Portugal are materially adversely affecting the
liquidity, business and/or financial conditions of the BES Group’s borrowers, which are in turn
further increasing the BES Group’s non-performing loan ratios, impairing its loan and other financial
assets and resulting in decreased demand for borrowings in general.

Even if the Stabilisation Programme is successfully implemented, it is uncertain whether it will
achieve the set targets. A failure of these measures may exacerbate current negative macroeconomic
conditions in Portugal and may prolong the recession. In such a case, the market reaction is likely to
be negative and business activity may deteriorate, which may have a material adverse effect on the
BES Group’s business, financial condition and results of operations.

Furthermore, the implementation of the required measures could have a material adverse effect on
the Portuguese economy, at least in the short term, due to its recessionary nature. It is also uncertain


                                              33
      whether the success of the Stabilisation Programme will enable the Portuguese economy to grow
      sufficiently to ease Portugal’s financial constraints. Any further significant deterioration of global
      economic conditions, including the credit profile of other EU countries, or the creditworthiness of
      Portuguese or international banks, or changes to the Euro Zone, may give rise to concerns regarding
      the ability of Portugal to meet its funding needs. In particular, during the second half of 2011 and
      first half of 2012 as the EU worked to develop a further assistance programme for Greece, the risk of
      sovereign default intensified and this raised concerns about the contagion effect such a Greek default
      would have on other economies. The focus of such contagion was largely directed at Portugal, as
      well as Ireland, Spain and Italy.

      In addition, even if the Stabilisation Programme is enacted and implemented in full, concerns
      relating to Portuguese public finances and negative financial contagion from events outside Portugal
      may continue to affect the liquidity and profitability of financial institutions in Portugal, resulting in,
      among other things, lower market values for Portuguese government debt; limited liquidity in the
      Portuguese banking system and reliance on external funding; increased competition for, and thus
      cost of, customer deposits; limited credit extension to customers; and a deterioration of credit
      quality. A failure to successfully implement the provisions of the Stabilisation Programme and to
      attain its fiscal targets may lead to the termination of financial support from the IMF and the EU,
      which would create the conditions for a credit event with respect to Portugal’s government debt.

      The adverse macroeconomic conditions in Portugal have significantly affected, and are expected to
      continue to adversely affect, the behaviour and the financial situation of the BES Group’s clients,
      and consequently, the supply and demand of the products and services that the BES Group has to
      offer. In particular, limited growth in customer loans is expected in the coming years, which will
      make it difficult for the BES Group to generate enough interest income to maintain its net interest
      margin. Furthermore, the continuing growth of unemployment, the reduction of the profitability of
      enterprises and an increase in company and personal insolvencies have had, and are expected to
      continue to have, a negative influence on BES’ clients’ ability to pay back loans, and, consequently,
      could cause an increase in the ratio of overdue loans, which might exceed the standard historic
      average, reflecting a deterioration of the quality of assets of the BES Group.

1.2   Global economic conditions and the European Sovereign Debt Crisis

      The BES Group’s businesses and performance are being and may continue to be negatively affected
      by current local and global economic conditions and adverse perceptions of those conditions and
      future economic prospects.

      In particular, during 2011, the heightened perceived risk of sovereign default relating to certain EU
      Member States, in particular Greece, had a negative impact on global financial markets. Against a
      background of increasing unease over the macro/financial implications of sizeable fiscal imbalances
      among several Euro sovereign issuers, including Portugal, investors have reduced their investment in
      these countries and the default, or a significant decline in the credit rating, of one or more sovereigns
      or financial institutions could cause severe stress in the financial system generally and could
      adversely affect the markets in which the BES Group operates. Although the 3-year liquidity
      operations conducted by the ECB in December 2011 and February 2012 and the presentation of the
      programme of purchase of public debt securities in the secondary market (“Outright Monetary
      Transactions”) by the European Central Bank in September 2012 contributed to a stabilisation of the
      financial markets, levels of uncertainty remain relatively high.

      The outlook for the global economy over the near to medium term remains challenging, particularly
      in Portugal and other European countries, while a moderate recovery in the United States and Japan
      is expected throughout the year. Some negative factors should continue to hold back economic
      growth during 2013, namely: (i) the persistence of fiscal problems in the United States, with the need


                                                      34
to raise the debt ceiling and significantly cut expenditure; (ii) the uncertainty associated with the
Euro Zone debt crisis, and particularly to the performance of the peripheral economies, still in
recession in 2013; (iii) the deleveraging, i.e., the reduction of indebtedness in the public and private
sectors in various economies, leading, among others, to the adoption and implementation of
restrictive fiscal policies, with negative impacts in the short term; (iv) an uncertain political
environment, dependent on decisions about the construction of the banking and fiscal union in the
Euro Zone, fears of austerity-driven political and social erosion; and (v) the heavy weight of public
and private debt in the main advanced economies, something which, historically, will take years to
adjust and should tend to put significant restrictions on growth. As a result of these factors, the main
economies should still report relatively low or moderate GDP growth rates in 2013, while the Euro
Zone is expected to post a marginally negative growth rate, mainly due to the contraction of activity
in the first months of the year.

Continued reduction in investment flows may further restrict economic recovery. Such challenging
economic and market conditions exert downward pressure on asset prices and on credit availability,
and upward pressure on funding costs, and may continue to impact asset recovery rates and the credit
quality of the BES Group’s businesses, customers and counterparties, including sovereigns. In
particular, the BES Group has significant exposure to customers and counterparties in the European
Union (particularly in Portugal) and would be affected by any restructuring of the terms, principal,
interest or maturity of their borrowings.

Any significant deterioration in the global economy, including in the credit profiles of other EU
Member States or in the solvency of Portuguese or international banks, or certain other economic
changes in the Euro Zone could:

       Negatively affect the capacity of the Republic of Portugal to satisfy its financing needs;

       Have a direct negative impact on the value of BES’ portfolio of Portuguese public debt
        securities (as of 31st December, 2012, the Bank held approximately €3.2 billion in
        Portuguese public debt). In relation to the sovereign debt of other EU periphery economies,
        the BES Group held €605 million of Spanish public debt, €25 million of Irish public debt,
        €28 million on Italian public debt and €3 million of Greek public debt. BES is a market
        maker of Portuguese sovereign debt and also takes risk positions in such sovereign debt with
        the amount of its holdings and the portfolio’s average maturity varying from time to time as
        a result of its market making and risk taking activities and its view regarding the
        attractiveness of such debt;

       Have a significant adverse effect on the Bank’s capacity to raise and/or generate capital and
        comply with minimum regulatory capital requirements;

       Significantly restrict the Bank’s ability to obtain liquidity; and

       Negatively affect the Bank’s capital position, its operational results and its financial
        condition.

As a consequence of the systemic risk resulting from the sovereign debt crisis in the Euro area, the
EU summit of 27th October, 2011 decided that banks subject to the European Banking Authority’s
(“EBA”) stress tests should reinforce their capital ratios in order to achieve, by 30th June, 2012, a
Core Tier 1 ratio of 9 per cent. after a mark-to-market valuation of sovereign debt exposures held by
those institutions as of 30th September, 2011. BES’ total capital needs, applying EBA’s
methodology, as of 30th September, 2011, were €810 million, of which €121 million resulted from
the mark-to-market valuation of the sovereign debt exposure. Notwithstanding the fact that the EBA
stress tests are performed at the ESFG Group level (a major shareholder of BES and a company for


                                               35
      which BES is a significant investment), BES has used the same methodology to calculate its total
      capital needs, as presented above.

      The possibility of a Greek default and the contagion effect it may have on other EU economies such
      as Ireland, Italy, Spain and especially Portugal may continue to create market instability, despite the
      favourable effect from the 3-year liquidity operations from the ECB in December 2011 and February
      2012 and the presentation of the programme of Outright Monetary Transactions by the European
      Central Bank in September 2012, which contributed to the stabilisation of the financial markets and
      a significant improvement in terms of the liquidity available in the market. These downward
      pressures on growth were not counterbalanced by fiscal policy stimuli, as European governments
      continued to implement restrictive fiscal policies, not only in the European periphery economies, but
      also in the main core European economies. After having contracted by 0.6 per cent. in 2012, the
      Euro Zone economy contracted by 0.2 per cent. in the first quarter of 2013 and is widely expected to
      continue to contract throughout the first half of 2013, exerting additional pressure on the Portuguese
      economy.

1.3   Financial Markets

      The performance of the BES Group is generally influenced by conditions in the global financial
      markets and the macroeconomic conditions in the countries in which it operates. In particular, the
      global financial system has operated under difficult conditions since August 2007 and the financial
      markets have had particularly negative performances after the insolvency of several international
      financial institutions since September 2008. This situation has caused unprecedented disruptions in
      the financial markets worldwide in relation to liquidity and funding of the international banking
      system. Furthermore, this situation has put significant pressure on the core business of many
      investment banks, commercial banks, and insurance companies worldwide. In response to the
      instability and lack of liquidity in the market, some countries, including some members of the EU
      and the United States of America, have intervened by injecting liquidity and capital into the system
      with the goal of stabilising these financial markets and, in some cases, preventing the insolvency of
      certain financial institutions.

      Despite these measures, volatility in the capital markets has continued at an extraordinary level
      compared to the past. The potential impact of the sovereign debt crisis in Europe has exacerbated
      investors’ fears and created a cloud of uncertainty with respect to the European financial sector,
      particularly with respect to the economies in the periphery of the Euro Zone. These developments
      have created an unfavourable environment for banking activity generally. The current economic
      environment creates challenges for the BES Group and may adversely affect its business, financial
      condition and results of operations in the following ways:

             The circumstances mentioned above have caused a general slowdown in the business of the
              BES Group, an increase in its funding costs (both wholesale and retail) and a reduction in its
              share prices and asset values. Any worsening of the current economic climate could
              jeopardise the BES Group’s strategy or exacerbate these trends and adversely affect its
              financial performance and condition.

             The BES Group is exposed to potential losses if certain financial institutions, or other
              counterparties to the BES Group, become insolvent or are not able to meet their financial
              obligations to the BES Group. Moreover, the performance of the BES Group may be
              influenced by an inability to recover the value of its assets at percentage levels consistent
              with its historical recovery estimates, particularly as such estimates could prove to be
              inaccurate in light of the unprecedented turbulence in the markets.




                                                    36
             Numerous banks worldwide have been and are being supported in part by various “rescue
              plans” and other types of support by their home country governments. The BES Group is
              uncertain as to how much longer governmental support will be needed to keep these banks
              solvent and whether governments will have the means or the political will to continue, or if
              necessary expand, this support. Any failure of government support to continue, or if
              necessary to expand, could result in more bank failures and a heightened lack of confidence
              in the global banking system, thus increasing the challenges faced by BES and other
              financial institutions.

             In addition, external intervention from the EU and the IMF might involve a reorganisation of
              the Portuguese banks. Whilst this may erode their deposit base and negatively impact upon
              their financing needs, it might also provide the conditions necessary to ensure that
              Portuguese banks have access to regular funding during the Stabilisation Programme. There
              can be no assurance, however, that the funding requirements originally anticipated will be
              adequate. There might also be difficulties in resuming market based financing when the
              Stabilisation Programme is completed. In the future, Portuguese banks might be required to
              comply with more stringent regulatory capital ratios that necessitate recapitalisation. In the
              context of the programme agreed by the Portuguese government with the Troika, the Bank
              of Portugal set the minimum Core Tier 1 ratio at 10 per cent. to be met by Portuguese banks
              from December 2012. BES Core Tier 1 ratio as of 31st December, 2012 was 10.5 per cent.
              In general, the current economic conditions and unfavourable financial environment,
              including those potential developments outlined above, could have a material adverse effect
              on the BES Group’s business, financial condition and results of operations.

1.4   Banking Markets

      The BES Group faces intense competition in all of its areas of operation (including, among others,
      corporate and retail banking, investment banking, specialised credit and asset management), both in
      Portugal and its international markets. Competition for customer deposits has been especially intense
      in Portugal. The BES Group’s competitors in the markets in which it is active are principally
      commercial and investment banks.

      The continuing financial crisis could introduce additional competitive challenges, as many national
      governments (including the Portuguese government) seek to provide support in a variety of forms to
      banks organised in their jurisdictions. Depending on the level of this government support and the
      financial strength of the banks in question, this support could strengthen the competitive position of
      these banks and intensify the competition faced by the BES Group.

      Structural changes in the Portuguese economy in the past have significantly increased competition in
      the Portuguese banking sector. These changes are principally related to the privatisation of several
      sectors of the economy, including banking and insurance, as well as to the integration of the
      Portuguese economy into the European Union and the introduction of the Euro. Mergers and
      acquisitions involving the largest Portuguese banks have resulted in a significant concentration of
      market share, a process which may continue. Competition has further increased with the emergence
      of non-traditional distribution channels such as internet and telephone banking.

      Competition for customer deposits has been especially intense in Portugal. Competition in the
      Portuguese market can have an adverse effect on the activities of the BES Group. The competition is
      affected by consumer demand, technological changes, the impact of consolidation, regulatory actions
      and other factors. If the BES Group is unable to provide attractive product and service offerings that
      are profitable, it may lose market share or incur losses on some or all of its activities, which could
      adversely affect its financial condition and its results of operations. Although BES believes that it is



                                                    37
      in a strong position to continue to compete in the markets in which it operates, there can be no
      assurance that it will be able to compete effectively in these markets.

      In addition, competition in the Angolan market is robust, with international banks competing against
      some very strong local and regional players. BES believes that increased competition in Angola
      could put pressure on its operations there.

1.5   Economic conditions in the international markets and adverse political, governmental or
      economic developments related to its internation expansion

      The BES Group continues to pursue its international strategy, with particular emphasis on expanding
      its market position in Spain, Brazil and Africa (namely in Angola, Mozambique, Libya and Cape
      Verde) and continuing to capitalise on its established positions in France, Luxembourg, the United
      Kingdom, the United States and Macao. The BES Group’s performance, results of operations and
      financial condition are affected by the economic conditions and levels of economic activity in the
      countries where the BES Group operates, including in Spain, Brazil and Angola. Consequently, a
      protracted global economic decline could reduce the overall level of economic activity of any one or
      more of the international markets where the BES Group’s operates, which could have an adverse
      effect on the BES Group and its results of operations and financial condition.

      Accordingly, BES gives no assurance that it will be successful in Spain, Brazil, Angola or any of the
      other international markets in which it operates. The BES Group’s international operations are
      exposed to the risk of adverse political, governmental or economic developments in the countries in
      which it operates and other risks associated with doing business in emerging markets. In particular,
      certain countries where the BES Group has operations, including Angola, have experienced political,
      civil and economic instability in the past and may face such instability again in the future. These
      factors could have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of
      operations.

      In Libya, which is still consolidating the political and government changes following the fall of the
      Ghadafi regime, the BES Group has exposure through a participation of 40 per cent. in Aman Bank
      (with management control). Although Aman Bank has not been the subject of sanctions, and did not
      suffer significant damage to its infrastructure during the war to overthrow the previous regime, there
      can be no assurance regarding its future performance due to uncertainty following the regime
      change, particularly as the country transitions to a new government and institutions.

1.6   Interest Rate Risk

      The BES Group is subject to the risks typical of banking activities, such as interest rate fluctuations.
      Interest rate risk may be defined as the impact on shareholders’ equity or on net interest income due
      to an adverse change in market interest rates. As is the case with other banks in Portugal, the BES
      Group, and especially its corporate and retail segment, is particularly exposed to differentials
      between the interest rates payable by it on deposits and the interest rates that it is able to charge on
      loans to customers and other banks. This exposure comes from the fact that, in the Portuguese
      market, loans typically have variable interest rates, whereas the interest rates applicable to deposits
      are usually fixed for periods that may vary between three months and three years. As a result,
      Portuguese banks, including BES, frequently experience difficulties in adjusting the interest rates
      that they pay for deposits in line with market interest rate changes. This trend is reinforced by
      intense competition in the sector and the current low interest rate environment that puts pressure on a
      bank’s deposit margin.

      Interest rates are sensitive to several factors that are out of the BES Group’s control, including fiscal
      and monetary policies of governments and central banks, as well as domestic and international


                                                     38
      economic and political conditions. Changes in market interest rates can affect the interest rates that
      the BES Group actually charges, receives on its interest-earning assets, in a different way when
      compared to the rates that the BES Group pays for its interest bearing liabilities. This difference may
      reduce the net interest margin, which could have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s
      results of operations.

      As a result of the sovereign debt crisis and the weak European economic conditions and outlook, the
      ECB has lowered its benchmark interest rate for the Euro Zone from 1 per cent. to 0.75 per cent. in
      July 2012 and to 0.5 per cent. in May 2013, respectively.

      A rise in interest rates could reduce the demand for credit and the BES Group’s ability to generate
      credit for its clients, as well as contribute to an increase in the credit default rate. Conversely, a
      further reduction in the level of interest rates may adversely affect the BES Group through, among
      other things, a lower margin on deposits, a decrease in demand for deposits and an increase in
      competition in deposit-taking and lending to customers. As a result of these factors, significant
      changes or volatility in interest rates could have a material adverse impact on the business, financial
      condition or operating results of the BES Group.

      The BES Group has been repricing its loan portfolio. However, it has not repriced its portfolio of
      mortgages, which represented, on 31st December, 2012, 22.7 per cent. of the gross loans to its
      clients. Therefore the BES Group is dependent on obtaining higher spreads on new loan production
      to impact, on a long-term basis, the average interest spread of its global mortgages portfolio. If the
      BES Group is unable to adjust the interest rate payable on deposits in line with the changes in market
      interest rates receivable by it on loans, or if the BES Group’s monitoring procedures are unable to
      manage adequately interest rate risk, its net interest income could rise less or decline more than its
      interest expense, in which case the BES Group’s results could be negatively affected.

1.7   Credit Risk

      Risks arising from changes in credit quality and the repayment of loans and amounts due from
      borrowers and counterparties are inherent in a wide range of the BES Group’s business. Adverse
      changes in the credit quality of the BES Group’s borrowers and counterparties, a general
      deterioration in Portuguese or global economic conditions, or increased systemic risks in financial
      systems, could affect the recovery and value of the BES Group’s assets and require an increase in
      provision for bad and doubtful debts and other provisions. Over the past three years, the BES Group
      has set aside provisions for loan losses of €351.8 million, €600.6 million and €814.8 million in each
      of 2010, 2011 and 2012, respectively. Accordingly, the BES Group is subject to credit risk, i.e. the
      risk that the BES Group’s clients and other counterparties are unable to fulfil their payment
      obligations.

      The BES Group is exposed to different counterparties in the normal course of its business, but its
      exposure to counterparties in the financial services industry is significant. This exposure can arise
      through trading, lending, deposit-taking, clearance and settlement and numerous other activities and
      relationships. These counterparties include institutional clients, brokers and dealers, commercial
      banks and investment banks. Many of these relationships expose the BES Group to credit risk in the
      event of default of a counterparty or client. In addition, the BES Group’s credit risk may be
      exacerbated when the collateral it holds cannot be realised at, or is liquidated at prices not sufficient
      to recover, the full amount of the loan or derivative exposure it is due to cover. Many of the hedging
      and other risk management strategies utilised by the BES Group also involve transactions with
      financial services counterparties. The insolvency of these counterparties may impair the
      effectiveness of the BES Group’s hedging and other risk management strategies, which could in turn
      have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of operations.



                                                     39
      Although the BES Group regularly reviews its exposure to its clients and other counterparties, as
      well as its exposure to certain economic sectors and regions which the BES Group believes to be
      particularly critical, payment defaults may arise from events and circumstances that are
      unforeseeable or difficult to predict or detect. In addition, the collateral and security provided to the
      BES Group may be insufficient to cover the exposure or others’ obligations to it, for example, as a
      result of sudden market declines that reduce the value of the collateral. Accordingly, if a major client
      or other significant counterparty were to default on its obligations this could have a material adverse
      effect on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of operations.

      The BES Group actively manages credit risk and analyses credit transactions. Expectations about
      future credit losses may, however, be incorrect for a variety of reasons. An unexpected decline in
      general economic conditions, unanticipated political events or a lack of liquidity in the economy may
      result in credit losses which exceed the amount of the BES Group’s provisions or the maximum
      probable losses envisaged by its risk management models. As the BES Group’s operations are
      mostly concentrated in Portugal, it is particularly exposed to the risk of a general economic
      downturn or other events which affect default rates in Portugal. An increase in the BES Group’s
      provisions for loan losses or any loan losses in excess of these provisions could have a material
      adverse effect on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of operations. The BES Group’s
      credit at risk1 was €4.8 billion (9.4 per cent.) as at 31st December, 2012.

1.8   Market Risk

      The BES Group currently engages in various treasury activities for its own account, including
      entering into interest rate, credit, liquidity and exchange rate derivative transactions as well as taking
      positions in fixed income and equity in the domestic and international markets and trading in the
      primary and secondary markets for government securities.

      The BES Group presented a value at risk (VaR) of €38.1 million as at 31st December, 2012 (a
      decrease from €47.5 million as at 31st December, 2011) in its trading positions in respect of shares,
      interest rates, volatility and credit spread, commodities and foreign exchange (excluding the position
      of foreign exchange relating to shares of the portfolio of assets available for sale and the portfolio of
      assets at fair value). VaR is calculated using the Monte Carlo simulation, with 99 per cent.
      confidence level and an investment period of 10 days.

      Proprietary trading involves a certain degree of risk. Future proprietary trading results will in part
      depend on market conditions, and although the BES Group seeks to actively manage its capital
      markets exposure, it cannot assure it will be successful in doing so. Current market conditions are
      characterised by extreme volatility, which increase the likelihood of negative proprietary trading
      results and puts downward pressure on asset valuations. Protracted adverse market movements,
      particularly asset price declines, can reduce the level of activity in the market or reduce market
      liquidity. These developments can lead to material losses if BES Group cannot close out
      deteriorating positions in a timely way. This may especially be the case for assets for which there are
      less liquid markets.

      Assets that are not traded on stock exchanges or other public trading markets, such as derivative
      contracts between banks, may have values that BES Group calculates using models other than
      publicly quoted prices. Monitoring the deterioration of prices of assets like these is difficult and
      could lead to losses that BES Group does not anticipate. As such, the BES Group could incur



1
      According to Instruction 23/2011 of the Bank of Portugal, credit at risk includes: a) the total value of credit with capital or interest overdue
      by 90 days or more; b) other restructured credit, where the principal or interest payments were overdue by more than 90 days and have
      been capitalised or refinanced without full coverage by collateral or the interest due has not been fully paid by the debtor and c) credits of
      an insolvent or bankrupt debtor.


                                                                      40
      significant losses, which could have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s financial
      condition and results of operations.

1.9   Liquidity risk

      Liquidity risk arises from the present or future inability to pay liabilities as they mature. Banks,
      principally by virtue of their business of providing long-term loans and receiving short-term
      deposits, are subject to liquidity risk. Over the last few years many banks have resorted to obtaining
      funds from market sources instead of their traditional sources (retail deposits).

      As of 31st December, 2012, the BES Group’s cumulative liquidity gap, calculated in accordance
      with Bank of Portugal Instruction 13/2009, was €9.4 billion (31st December, 2011: €0.6 billion). The
      liquidity buffer, i.e. the amount of liquid assets that mature within more than one year, was €0.6
      billion as at the same date (31st December, 2011: €2.8 billion).

      The maintenance of sufficient customer deposits to fund the BES Group’s loan portfolio is subject to
      certain factors outside the BES Group’s control, such as depositors’ concerns relating to the
      economy in general, the financial services industry or the BES Group specifically, ratings
      downgrades, significant further deterioration in economic conditions in the Republic of Portugal and
      the existence and extent of deposit guarantees. Any of these factors on their own or in combination
      could lead to a reduction in the BES Group’s ability to access customer deposit funding on
      appropriate terms in the future and could result in deposit outflows, both of which would have an
      impact on the BES Group’s ability to fund its operations and meet its minimum liquidity
      requirements, and may require BES to increase its use of sources other than deposits, if available, to
      fund its loan portfolio.

      The BES Group’s liquidity could also be impaired by an inability to access debt markets, an inability
      to sell assets or redeem its investments, other outflows of cash or collateral deterioration. These
      situations may arise due to circumstances that the BES Group is unable to control, such as continued
      general market disruption, loss in confidence in financial markets, uncertainty and speculation
      regarding the solvency of market participants, credit rating downgrades or operational problems that
      affect third parties. Access to the financial markets has been limited since the disruptions in the
      credit markets in 2007. Funding in the interbank markets or via the capital markets has been very
      difficult, especially since 2010 for banks from the EU periphery economies. Even a perception
      among market participants that a financial institution is experiencing greater liquidity risk can cause
      significant damage to the institution. Specific ways in which the BES Group could find its liquidity
      further impaired include the following:

             The BES Group’s ability to sell assets may be impaired if other market participants are
              seeking to sell similar assets at the same time or are not in the position to finance themselves
              or are distressed sellers, or because the market value of assets, including financial
              instruments underlying derivative transactions to which the BES Group is a party, is difficult
              to ascertain, as has occurred in the recent past.

             Financial institutions with which the BES Group interacts may exercise set-off rights or the
              right to require additional collateral, which could further impair the BES Group’s liquidity
              position. If the customers with which the BES Group has outstanding but undrawn lending
              commitments were to draw down on these credit lines at a rate that is higher than BES is
              anticipating, this could put increased pressure on the BES Group’s liquidity position.

             The BES Group’s contingency plan for liquidity stress scenarios relies in part on its ability
              to enter into repo transactions with the European Central Bank. If the European Central
              Bank were to suspend its repo programme, and if no similar source of repo financing were to


                                                    41
        exist in the market at that time, this could severely impede BES’ ability to manage a period
        of liquidity stress.

       An increase in interest rates and/or credit spreads, as well as any restriction on the
        availability of credit, including, but not limited to, inter-bank credit, could impact the BES
        Group’s ability to borrow on a secured or unsecured basis, which may have a material
        adverse effect on the BES Group’s liquidity and results of operations.

Any of these events could cause the BES Group to curtail its business activities and could increase
its cost of funding, both of which could have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s business
and results of operations.

Although the BES Group puts significant effort in liquidity risk management and focuses on
maintaining liquidity surplus in the short term, the BES Group is exposed to the general risk of
liquidity shortfalls and cannot ensure that the procedures in place to manage such risks will be
suitable to eliminate liquidity risk.

Reliance on the European Central Bank for funding and liquidity

As a result of the very difficult conditions in the capital markets for short or medium-long term
funding, the BES Group’s liquidity operations with the ECB are very important. The ECB currently
makes funding available to European banks that satisfy certain conditions to obtain such funding,
including pledging eligible collateral.

At 31st December, 2012, the BES Group’s total portfolio of securities eligible for rediscount with
the ECB was €19.4 billion (31st December, 2011: €15.1 billion). The ECB establishes the valuation
and the eligibility criteria for collateral assets to be used on repo transactions with financial
institutions. Changes to these valuations or the eligibility criteria can have a negative impact on the
amount of available assets for that purpose, and reduce the liquidity lines available from the ECB.
Additionally, further downgrades of the credit rating of the Republic of Portugal or Portuguese
corporations would result in increased haircuts to any eligible collateral or such debt not being
eligible and consequently a reduction in the pool of assets that might be considered eligible
collateral.

At 31st December, 2012, BES had outstanding borrowings of €7.9 billion from the ECB (31st
December, 2011: €6.9 billion), borrowed against the BES Group’s portfolio of securities eligible for
rediscount with the ECB. In the current environment, the curtailment or termination of liquidity
operations by the ECB could result in the BES Group having to dispose of its assets, potentially with
a high discount to their book values, in order to comply with its obligations and to seek alternative
sources of funding which might only be available, if at all, at unfavourable conditions and could
significantly increase its funding costs. This would have a corresponding negative impact on its
results of operations and financial condition.

Nonetheless, due to significant instability and volatility in the financial markets, in October 2011, the
ECB announced new long-term refinancing operations with maturities of 12 and 13 months (in the
amounts to be requested by the banks) and the maintenance of the normal liquidity lending
operations in unlimited amounts (for one week, one month and three months). In addition, the ECB
progressively reduced the key benchmark rate (to 1 per cent. in December 2011, 0.75 per cent. in
July 2012 and 0.5 per cent. in May 2013) and announced a number of measures to facilitate the Euro
Zone banking sector’s access to liquidity and the restoration of the ordinary course of the interbank
money markets:




                                               42
       (i)     the reduction of the reserve requirement ratio for European banks from 2 per cent. to 1 per
               cent.,

       (ii)    two unlimited three-year liquidity facilities (instead of the previous maximum term of 13
               months) to be made available on 21st December, 2011 and 29th February, 2012 (the total
               amount borrowed by the BES Group under these facilities is €10.2 billion) of which €1
               billion was already reimbursed in the beginning of 2013, and

       (iii)   the loosening of the eligibility criteria for collaterals accepted by the ECB.

       The BES Group has been implementing measures in order to diversify its financing sources beyond
       the ECB, and has accelerated the deleveraging process by making an effort to increase customer
       funds and reduce customer loans. This risks increasing the cost of deposits, which may not be
       completely offset by the process of repricing of loans and could adversely impact the net interest
       margin. There can be no assurances as to when BES will again be able to access the public wholesale
       markets or the cost of any market funding if and when such markets should become available.

       In addition to the usual and to the extraordinary liquidity measures provided by the ECB, there is a
       special measure, the Emergency Liquidity Assistance, to allow all Euro Zone central banks to
       support domestic financial institutions, which is applicable only to illiquid but solvent financial
       institutions. However, this is a temporary measure, which aims to re-establish the normal monetary
       transmission mechanisms and ensure the stability of the financial system, and the availability,
       quantum and conditionality of any funding is uncertain.

1.10   Operational Risk

       The BES Group is subject to certain operational risks, including interruption of service, errors, fraud
       by third parties (including large-scale organised frauds, as a result of the BES Group’s financial
       operations), breach or delays in the provision of services and compliance with risk management
       requirements. The BES Group continually monitors these risks by means of, among other things,
       advanced administrative and information systems and insurance coverage in respect of certain
       operational risks. However, the BES Group may be unable to successfully monitor or prevent these
       risks in the future. Any failure to successfully execute the BES Group’s operational risk management
       and control policies could have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s financial condition and
       results of operations.

1.11   Risks associated with the implementation of its risk management policies

       The BES Group is exposed to a number of risks, including, among others, market risk, credit risk,
       liquidity risk and operational risk. Although BES has implemented risk management policies for
       each of the risks that it is exposed to, the policies and procedures it employs to identify, monitor and
       manage these risks may not be fully effective.

1.12   Risks associated with the increasing dependence on information technology systems

       Banks and their activities are increasingly dependent on highly sophisticated information technology
       (“IT”) systems. IT systems are vulnerable to a number of problems, such as software or hardware
       malfunctions, malicious hacking, physical damage to vital IT centres and computer viruses.
       Harmonising the IT systems in the BES Group to create a consistent IT architecture poses significant
       challenges. IT systems need regular upgrading to meet the needs of changing business and regulatory
       requirements and to keep pace with possible expansion into new markets.

       The BES Group may not be able to implement necessary upgrades on a timely basis, and upgrades
       may fail to function as planned. In addition to costs that may be incurred as a result of any failure of

                                                      43
       its IT systems, the BES Group could face fines from bank regulators if its IT systems fail to enable it
       to comply with applicable banking or reporting regulations.

       The BES Group maintains back-up systems for its operations, with one of those back-up systems
       being located in Portugal outside of its premises. However, there are limited scenarios, for example
       in the event of a major catastrophe resulting in the failure of its information systems, where the BES
       Group could lose certain recently entered data with regard to its Portuguese operations or could lose
       more significant portions of data with regard to its international operations.

       The BES Group is reliant on its outsourcing contract with IBM for the maintenance and operation of
       its IT systems. Should IBM become unwilling or unable to fulfil its obligations under the
       outsourcing contract, the BES Group could find the smooth functioning of its IT systems
       compromised.

       A major disruption of the BES Group’s IT systems, whether under the scenarios outlined above or
       under other scenarios, could have a material adverse effect on the normal operation of the BES
       Group’s business and thus on its financial condition and results of operations.

1.13   Risks associated with the ability to maintain its customer base

       The BES Group’s success depends on its ability to maintain its customer base and to offer its
       customers a wide range of high quality and competitive products and consistently high levels of
       service. The BES Group has sought to achieve this objective by segmenting its branch networks to
       better serve the diverse needs of each customer segment through, among other things, cross-selling
       the products and services of the BES Group’s subsidiaries through its marketing and distribution
       networks in Portugal. Any failure to maintain the BES Group’s customer base or to offer the BES
       Group’s customers a wide range of high quality and competitive products or consistently high levels
       of service could have a material adverse effect on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of
       operations.

1.14   Regulation

       Banking activities in Portugal are subject to extensive regulation by supervision authorities, which
       have broad administrative powers over many aspects of the financial services business, which
       include liquidity, capital adequacy and permitted investments, ethical issues, money laundering,
       privacy, securities (including debt instruments) issuance and offering/placement, financial
       intermediation issues, record-keeping, marketing and selling practices, among others. These various
       regulations can significantly increase the cost structure of a bank and limit its possibilities for
       increasing its income.

       Specific examples where regulation can impact the conduct of the BES Group’s business include the
       following:

              The minimum cash requirement to be held with the Bank of Portugal applicable to
               Portuguese banks was fixed at 2 per cent. of the total amount of deposits until 18th January,
               2012, when the reserve requirement ratio was reduced to 1 per cent. An increase in this
               percentage or a decline in the rate accrued on those cash reserves would have an adverse
               impact on the BES Group’s net income.

              Further to the Stabilisation Programme agreed by the Troika and the Portuguese government
               in the second quarter of 2011, Portuguese banks are required to maintain a minimum Core
               Tier 1 Capital ratio of 9 per cent. by 31st December, 2011, 10 per cent. by 31st December,




                                                     44
        2012 (Notice no. 3/2011 issued by the Bank of Portugal) and 10 per cent. from December,
        2012.

The BES Group capital ratios are calculated under the Basel II regulations. As from the first quarter
of 2009, BES has been authorised by the Bank of Portugal to use the Internal Ratings Based (“IRB”)
approach to calculate credit risk extended by BES headquarters, BES’ London branch and BES
Investimento, to be extended with a roll-out to other BES Group entities and portfolios. The
Standardised Approach method (“TSA method”) is used for operational risk.

At the end of the third quarter of 2010, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision made several
decisions regarding the functioning of the global financial system, that have resulted in a set of
recommendations, named Basel III. Banks have a transitory period (from 1st January, 2013 to 1st
January, 2019) to comply with the approved rules, aimed at strengthening financial institutions and
preventing new financial crises in the future.

Basel III rules set out the following regulatory framework to be gradually implemented by 1st
January, 2019:

       Minimum Common Equity Tier 1 ratio: 7 per cent. (made up of a 4.5 per cent. minimum
        requirement and an additional 2.5 per cent. capital conservation buffer);

       Minimum Tier 1 ratio: 8.5 per cent. (made up of a 6 per cent. minimum requirement and an
        additional 2.5 per cent. of capital conservation buffer);

       Total capital ratio: 10.5 per cent.;

       Introduction of an additional counter-cyclical buffer of between 0 per cent. and 2.5 per cent.
        of risk weighted assets to be composed of Common Equity Tier 1 capital under conditions to
        be determined by the regulatory authorities; and

       Establishment of transitional periods to the absorption of the deductions of capital items not
        eligible under Basel III and new deductions to the capital base.

The liquidity changes include the proposed introduction of short-term and longer-term standards for
funding liquidity referred to as the Liquidity Coverage Ratio and the Net Stable Funding Ratio. The
Liquidity Coverage Ratio, which is recommended for introduction in 2015, addresses the sufficiency
of high quality liquid assets to meet short-term liquidity needs under a specified acute stress scenario
which may not fall below 100 per cent. of the estimated net cash outflows for the following 30 days.
The Net Stable Funding Ratio, which is recommended for introduction in 2018, will seek to establish
a minimum acceptable amount of stable funding based on the liquidity characteristics of an
institution’s assets and activities over a one-year period.

The Basel III rules have not yet been approved by the European Union and their incorporation into
European and national law has, accordingly, not yet taken place. On 20th July, 2011, the European
Commission adopted a legislative package of proposals (known as CRD IV) to implement the
changes through the replacement of the existing Capital Requirements Directive with a new
Directive and Regulation. As with Basel III, the proposals contemplate the entry into force of the
new legislation from January 2013, with full implementation by January 2019; however the
proposals allow individual Member States to implement the stricter definition and/or level of capital
more quickly than is envisaged under Basel III.

The leverage ratio is defined as Tier 1 capital divided by a measure of non risk weighted assets. If
Basel III is followed under CRD IV, the leverage ratio may not fall below 3 per cent. effective as of


                                               45
       2017. The ultimate aim of Basel III/CRD IV is to reduce leverage in order to bring institutions’
       assets more in line with their capital.

       At 31st December, 2012, the total capital ratio of the BES Group was 11.3 per cent., with its Tier 1
       ratio and Core Tier 1 ratio equal to 10.4 per cent. and 10.5 per cent., respectively. Such ratios were,
       respectively, 10.7 per cent., 9.4 per cent. and 9.2 per cent. at 31st December 2011. The capital
       adequacy requirements applicable to the BES Group limit its ability to advance loans to customers
       and may require it to issue additional equity capital or subordinated debt in the future, which are
       expensive sources of funds. Furthermore, capital adequacy ratios such as those mandated by Basel II
       have a “procyclical” effect, meaning that in difficult credit environments such as at present, a bank
       may find its capital ratios decreased at precisely the time that the economy is most in need of
       increased financing activity. Thus, as a result of this “procyclical” effect, capital adequacy
       requirements intended to ensure the health of banks can in fact exacerbate the effect of an economic
       downturn, further adding to the strain on the banking system.

       In addition, the Bank of Portugal has established minimum provisioning requirements regarding
       loans, non-performing loans, overdue loans, impairment for securities and equity holdings, sovereign
       risk and other contingencies. Therefore, any change in increase in the amount of these requirements
       could have an adverse impact on the BES Group’s financial condition and results of operations.

       The regulatory laws governing banking activity may change at any time in ways which may have an
       adverse effect on the business of the BES Group. Furthermore, the BES Group cannot predict the
       timing or form of any future regulatory initiatives. Changes in existing regulatory laws may
       materially affect the way in which the BES Group conducts its business, the products and services it
       can offer and the value of its assets.

       In addition, the BES Group’s operations are subject to national regulation in each jurisdiction in
       which it operates. Often, these regulations are complex and costly to comply with in terms of time
       and other resources. Breach of applicable regulations may lead to penalties, fines, compliance costs,
       reputational harm and even loss of licenses to operate.

1.15   Risks relating to BES shareholding and corporate structure

       As of December 2012, the major shareholders of BES hold, directly or indirectly, approximately 53
       per cent. of the voting rights of BES and have the ability to exercise significant influence over or
       determine the outcome of certain shareholder actions.

       BESPAR, which holds the interests of ESFG and an indirect stake in Crédit Agricole, owned 35.3
       per cent. of BES as of 31st December, 2012. Crédit Agricole, has a direct holding of 10.81 per cent.

1.16   The BES Group may be affected by the proposed introduction of a Financial Transactions Tax
       (“FTT”)

       The European Commission has published a proposal for a Directive for a common FTT in certain
       participating Member States (including Portugal), which may also impact persons not in participating
       Member States. The proposal remains subject to negotiation between participating Member States
       and is the subject of a legal challenge. Accordingly, it is not clear when the FTT will be
       implemented, if at all, and what form it will take if it is implemented.

       Given the lack of certainty surrounding the proposals and their implementation, it is not possible to
       predict what effect the proposed financial transaction tax might have on the business of the BES
       Group as it could materially adversely affect the business of the BES Group.




                                                     46
RISK FACTORS RELATING TO BES FINANCE

2.    Factors that may affect BES Finance’s ability to fulfil its obligations under the Notes issued
      under the Programme

      BES Finance Ltd is a funding vehicle of the BES Group. As such it raises funds to BES by way of
      intragroup loans. In the event that BES fails to make a payment under an intra-group loan, BES
      Finance may not be able to meet its payment obligations under the issued Notes.

RISK FACTORS RELATING TO THE NOTES ISSUED UNDER THE PROGRAMME

3.    Factors which are material for the purpose of assessing the market risks associated with Notes
      issued under the Programme

3.1   Risks related to the structure of a particular issue of Notes

      A wide range of Notes may be issued under the Programme. A number of these Notes may have
      features which contain particular risks for potential investors. Set out below is a description of the
      most common such features:

      Impact of Basel Committee reforms on subordinated debt

      On 16 December 2010, the Basel Committee issued its final guidance (the "Basel December 2010
      Guidelines") in relation to a package of new capital and liquidity requirements intended to reinforce
      capital standards and to establish minimum liquidity standards for credit institutions ("Basel III").
      The Basel December 2010 Guidelines included a set of eligibility criteria for Additional Tier 1 and
      Tier 2 capital instruments.

      In the European Union, Basel III will be implemented through the amended and re-stated Capital
      Requirements Directive (CRD IV), which will need to be transposed into the national law of each
      member state, and a new Regulation (CRR) which will be directly applicable in each member state.
      The final agreed text of CRD IV and CRR has been adopted by the European Parliament, and now
      requires the formal approval of the Council and translation into each of the official languages before
      publication in the Official Journal. If CRD IV and CRR are published in the Official Journal before 1
      July 2013, implementation will be from 1 January 2014. If the text is published on or after 1 July
      2013, implementation will be from 1 July 2014.

      The Basel Committee's press release dated 13 January 2011 entitled "Minimum requirements to
      ensure loss absorbency at the point of non-viability" included additional requirements for all Tier 2
      and Additional Tier 1 instruments (the "Basel III Non-Viability Requirement") as follows:

      "The terms and conditions of all non-common Tier 1 and Tier 2 instruments issued by an
      internationally active bank must have a provision that requires such instruments, at the option of the
      relevant authority, to either be written off or converted into common equity upon the occurrence of
      the trigger event unless:

      (a)     the governing jurisdiction of the bank has in place laws that (i) require such Tier 1 and Tier 2
              instruments to be written off upon such event, or (ii) otherwise require such instruments to
              fully absorb losses before tax payers are exposed to loss;

      (b)     a peer group review confirms that the jurisdiction conforms with clause (a); and

      (c)     it is disclosed by the relevant regulator and by the issuing bank, in issuance documents going
              forward, that such instruments are subject to loss under clause (a) in this paragraph.


                                                    47
The trigger event is the earlier of: (1) a decision that a write-off, without which the firm would
become non-viable, is necessary, as determined by the relevant authority; and (2) the decision to
make a public sector injection of capital, or equivalent support, without which the firm would have
become non-viable, as determined by the relevant authority."

The powers provided to resolution authorities in the draft CMD (see "Impact of EU Crisis
Management Directive" below) include powers to ensure relevant capital instruments (including Tier
2 capital instruments) fully absorb losses at the point of non-viability of the issuing institution. It is
expected that the CMD will confer powers on the resolution authorities to require such capital
instruments to be written down in full or converted into common equity Tier 1 instruments at the
point of non-viability and before any other resolution action is taken (the "CMD Loss Absorption
Requirement"). The draft CMD currently contemplates that the CMD Loss Absorption Requirement
will be implemented in Member States with effect from 1 January 2015.

The point of non-viability for such purposes is the point at which the appropriate resolution authority
determines that the institution meets the conditions for resolution or will no longer be viable unless
the relevant capital instruments are written down or extraordinary public support is provided and
without such support the appropriate authority determines that the institution would no longer be
viable.

It is currently unclear whether the CMD Loss Absorption Requirement, when implemented, will
apply to capital instruments (such as Subordinated Notes) that are already in issue at that time of
implementation or whether any transition rules will apply. If and to the extent that the CMD is
implemented so as to apply to instruments already in issue at the time of implementation, such Notes
will be subject to the provisions of the CMD (including the CMD Loss Absorption Requirement), in
which case such Notes may be subject to write-down or conversion to common equity Tier 1
instruments upon the occurrence of the relevant trigger event, which may result in holders of
Subordinated Notes losing some or all of their investment. The exercise of any such power or any
suggestion or anticipation of such exercise could, therefore, materially adversely affect the value of
such Notes.

In addition to the CMD Loss Absorption Requirement, the CMD is expected to provide resolution
authorities with broader powers to implement other resolution measures with respect to distressed
banks, which may include (without limitation) the replacement or substitution of the relevant Issuer
as obligor in respect of debt instruments, modifications to the terms of debt instruments (including
altering the maturity (if any) and/or the amount of interest payable and/or imposing a temporary
suspension on payments) and discontinuing the listing and admission to trading of financial
instruments.

As the draft CMD is not in final form, it is not yet possible to assess accurately the full impact of the
relevant loss absorption provisions. Until fully implemented, the relevant Issuer cannot predict the
precise effects of the changes that result from any proposed Basel III reforms on either its own
financial performance or the price of Subordinated Notes.

If the relevant Issuer has the right to redeem any Notes at its option, this may limit the market value
of the Notes concerned and an investor may not be able to reinvest the redemption proceeds in a
manner which achieves a similar effective return

An optional redemption feature of Notes is likely to limit their market value. During any period
when the relevant Issuer may elect to redeem Notes, the market value of those Notes generally will
not rise substantially above the price at which they can be redeemed. This also may be true prior to
any redemption period.



                                               48
The relevant Issuer may be expected to redeem Notes when its cost of borrowing is lower than the
interest rate on the Notes. At those times, an investor generally would not be able to reinvest the
redemption proceeds at an effective interest rate as high as the interest rate on the Notes being
redeemed and may only be able to do so at a significantly lower rate. Potential investors should
consider reinvestment risk in light of other investments available at that time.

If the relevant Issuer has the right to convert the interest rate on any Notes from a fixed rate to a
floating rate, or vice versa, this may affect the secondary market and the market value of the Notes
concerned

Fixed/Floating Rate Notes are Notes which may bear interest at a rate that converts from a fixed rate
to a floating rate, or from a floating rate to a fixed rate. Where the relevant Issuer has the right to
effect such a conversion, this will affect the secondary market and the market value of the Notes
since the relevant Issuer may be expected to convert the rate when it is likely to produce a lower
overall cost of borrowing. If the relevant Issuer converts from a fixed rate to a floating rate in such
circumstances, the spread on the Fixed/Floating Rate Notes may be less favourable than then
prevailing spreads on comparable Floating Rate Notes tied to the same reference rate. In addition,
the new floating rate at any time may be lower than the rates on other Notes. If the relevant Issuer
converts from a floating rate to a fixed rate in such circumstances, the fixed rate may be lower than
then prevailing market rates.

The interest rate on Reset Notes will reset on each Reset Date, which can be expected to affect the
interest payment on an investment in Reset Notes and could affect the market value of Reset Notes

Reset Notes will initially bear interest at the Initial Rate of Interest until (but excluding) the First
Reset Date. On the First Reset Date, the Second Reset Date (if applicable) and each Subsequent
Reset Date (if any) thereafter, the interest rate will be reset to the sum of the applicable Mid-Swap
Rate and the First Margin or Subsequent Margin (as applicable) as determined by the Calculation
Agent on the relevant Reset Determination Date (each such interest rate, a “Subsequent Reset Rate”).
The Subsequent Reset Rate for any Reset Period could be less than the Initial Rate of Interest or the
Subsequent Reset Rate for prior Reset Periods and could affect the market value of an investment in
the Reset Notes.

Notes which are issued at a substantial discount or premium may experience price volatility in
response to changes in market interest rates

The market values of securities issued at a substantial discount (such as Zero Coupon Notes) or
premium from their principal amount tend to fluctuate more in relation to general changes in interest
rates than do prices for more conventional interest-bearing securities. Generally, the longer the
remaining term of such securities, the greater the price volatility as compared to more conventional
interest-bearing securities with comparable maturities.

An investor in Subordinated Notes assumes an enhanced risk of loss in the event of the relevant
Issuer's and/or the Guarantor’s insolvency

The relevant Issuer’s obligations under Subordinated Notes will be unsecured and subordinated and
will rank junior in priority of payment to its obligations to Senior Creditors. “Senior Creditors”
means creditors of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank who (x) are depositors or other
unsubordinated creditors of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank or (y) are subordinated
creditors of the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank other than those whose claims rank pari
passu with or junior to the claims of the holders of Subordinated Notes or (in respect of the Bank)
persons entitled to claim under the Guarantee in respect of such Notes. Although Subordinated Notes
may pay a higher rate of interest than comparable Notes which are not subordinated, there is a real


                                              49
risk that an investor in Subordinated Notes will lose all or some of his investment should the Issuer
become insolvent.

Impact of EU Crisis Management Directive

The European Commission has published proposals for a crisis management directive which is
intended to enable a range of actions to be taken by relevant regulatory authorities in relation to
credit institutions and investment firms which are considered to be at risk of failing. The full scope
of the directive and its impact on the relevant Issuer is currently unclear but the implementation of
the directive or the taking of any action under it could materially affect the value of any Notes.

On 6 June 2012, the European Commission published a draft legislative proposal for a directive
providing for the establishment of an EU wide framework for the recovery and resolution of credit
institutions and investment firms (the "Crisis Management Directive" or "CMD"). The stated aim of
the draft CMD is to provide resolution authorities with common tools and powers to address banking
crises pre emptively in order to safeguard financial stability and minimise taxpayers' contributions to
bank bail outs and/or exposure to losses. The powers provided to authorities in the draft CMD are
divided into three categories: (i) preparatory steps and plans to minimise the risks of potential
problems (preparation and prevention); (ii) in the event of incipient problems, powers to arrest a
firm's deteriorating situation at an early stage so as to avoid insolvency (early intervention); and (iii)
if insolvency of a firm presents a concern as regards the general public interest, a clear means to
reorganise or wind down the firm in an orderly fashion while preserving its critical functions and
limiting to the maximum extent any exposure of taxpayers to losses.

The draft CMD currently contains four resolution tools and powers:

(i)     sale of business – enables resolution authorities to direct the sale of the firm or the whole or
        part of its business on commercial terms without requiring the consent of the shareholders or
        complying with the procedural requirements that would otherwise apply;

(ii)    bridge institution - enables resolution authorities to transfer of all or part of the business of
        the firm to a "bridge bank" (a public controlled entity);

(iii)   asset separation - enables resolution authorities to transfer impaired or problem assets to an
        asset management vehicle to allow them to be managed and worked out over time; and

(iv)    bail in - gives resolution authorities the power to write down the claims of unsecured
        creditors of a failing institution and to convert debt claims to equity (subject to certain
        parameters as to which liabilities would be eligible for the bail in tool).

The draft CMD currently contemplates that it will be implemented in European Union member states
with effect from 1 January 2015, except for the bail in tool, which is contemplated to be
implemented by 1 January 2018.

The powers currently set out in the draft CMD would impact how credit institutions and investment
firms are managed as well as, in certain circumstances, the rights of creditors. However, the
proposed directive is not in final form and changes may be made to it in the course of the legislative
process. In addition, many of the proposals contained in the draft CMD have already been
implemented in the Banking Act and it is currently unclear to what extent, if any, the provisions of
the Banking Act may need to change once the draft CMD is implemented. See risk factor entitled
"Impact of Basel Committee reforms on subordinated debt" above.

Accordingly, it is not yet possible to assess the full impact of the draft CMD on the relevant Issuer.
Once it is implemented, its implementation or the taking of any actions currently contemplated by it

                                               50
      may adversely affect the rights of Noteholders, the price or value of their investment in the Notes
      and/or the ability of the relevant Issuer to satisfy its obligations under the Notes.

3.2   Risks related to Notes generally

      Set out below is a description of material risks relating to the Notes generally:

      The Terms and Conditions of the Notes contain provisions which may permit their modification
      without the consent of all investors and confer significant discretions on the Trustee which may be
      exercised without the consent of the Holders and without regard to the individual interests of
      particular Holders

      The terms and conditions of the Notes contain provisions for calling meetings of Noteholders to
      consider matters affecting their interests generally. These provisions permit defined majorities to
      bind all Noteholders including Noteholders who did not attend and vote at the relevant meeting and
      Noteholders who voted in a manner contrary to the majority.

      The terms and conditions of the Bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes also provide that the
      Trustee may, without the consent of Noteholders and without regard to the interests of particular
      Noteholders, agree to (i) modifications of the Notes which are not, in the opinion of the Trustee,
      materially prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders or (ii) modifications to the Notes or the
      Trust Deed of a formal, minor or technical nature or which are made to correct a manifest error or to
      comply with mandatory provisions of the law of the jurisdiction in which the Issuer is incorporated
      or (iii) the substitution of another company as principal debtor under any Notes in place of the
      Issuer, in the circumstances described in Condition 18 of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes”.
      Interbolsa Notes are not constituted by the Trust Deed and thus any such modification or substitution
      will have to be agreed in accordance with the provisions of meetings of holders of Interbolsa Notes
      (see Condition 15(b) of the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes”).

      Withholding under the EU Savings Directive

      Under EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC on the taxation of savings income (the “Directive”),
      Member States are required to provide to the tax authorities of another Member State details of
      payments of interest or similar income paid by a person within its jurisdiction to an individual
      resident in that other Member State or to certain limited types of entities established in that other
      Member State. However, for a transitional period, Luxembourg and Austria are instead required
      (unless during that period they elect otherwise) to operate a withholding system in relation to such
      payments (the ending of such transitional period being dependent upon the conclusion of certain
      other agreements relating to information exchange with certain other countries). A number of non-
      EU countries and territories including Switzerland have adopted similar measures (a withholding
      system in the case of Switzerland).

      The European Commission has proposed certain amendments to the Directive, which may, if
      implemented, amend or broaden the scope of the requirements described above. At a meeting on 22
      May 2013, the European Council called for the adoption of an amended Directive before the end of
      2013.

      On 10 April 2013, the Luxembourg Ministry of Finance announced the Luxembourg government’s
      intention to abolish the withholding system with effect from 1 January 2015, in favour of automatic
      information exchange under the Directive for all interest payments made by Luxembourg financial
      operators to individuals resident in another Member State.

      If a payment were to be made or collected through a Member State which has opted for a
      withholding system and an amount of, or in respect of, tax were to be withheld from that payment,

                                                     51
neither the Issuer nor any Paying Agent (as defined in the Conditions of the Notes) nor any other
person would be obliged to pay additional amounts with respect to any Note as a result of the
imposition of such withholding tax. The Issuer is required to maintain a Paying Agent in a Member
State that is not obliged to withhold or deduct tax pursuant to the Directive.

Foreign Account Tax Compliance withholding may affect payments on the Notes

Pursuant to sections 1471 through 1474 of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (“FATCA”) or
similar law implementing an intergovernmental approach to FATCA, the Issuer and other non-
U.S.financial institutions through which payments on the Notes are made may be required to
withhold U.S. tax at a rate of 30 per cent. on all, or a portion of, certain payments in respect of the
Notes. This withholding tax may be triggered if (i) the Issuer is a foreign financial institution (“FFI”)
(as defined in FATCA) which enters into and complies with an agreement with the U.S. Internal
Revenue Service (“IRS”) to provide certain information on its account holders (making the Issuer a
“Participating FFI”), (ii) the Issuer makes payments treated as attributable to U.S. source payments
("foreign passthru payments"), and (iii) (a) an investor does not provide information sufficient for
the relevant Participating FFI to determine whether the investor is a U.S. person or should otherwise
be treated as holding a “United States Account” of such Issuer, or (b) any FFI, that is an investor, or
through which payment on such Notes is made is not a Participating FFI. When a payment will be
treated as a foreign passthru payment has not yet been defined, and no amounts will be required to be
withheld from any foreign passthru payments before 1st January, 2017. Withholding will be required
in respect of (i) any Notes issued on or after the date that is six months after the date final regulations
defining the term "foreign passthru payment" are published and (ii) any Notes which are treated as
equity for U.S. federal tax purposes, whenever issued.With respect to the Notes held through
Euroclear and Clearstream, while the Notes are in global form and held within the clearing systems,
in all but the most remote circumstances, it is not expected that FATCA will affect the amount of
any payment received by the clearing systems. However, with respect to the Notes held through
Interbolsa, payments made to the financial intermediaries holding control accounts with Interbolsa
could be subject to FATCA withholding if such financial intermediaries are not Participating FFIs.
FATCA may also affect payments made to custodians or intermediaries in the subsequent payment
chain leading to the ultimate investor if any such custodian or intermediary generally is unable to
receive payments free of FATCA withholding. It also may affect payment to any ultimate investor
that is a financial institution that is not entitled to receive payments free of withholding under
FATCA, or an ultimate investor that fails to provide its broker (or other custodian or intermediary
from which it receives payment) with any information, forms, other documentation or consents that
may be necessary for the payments to be made free of FATCA withholding. Investors should choose
the custodians or intermediaries with care (to ensure each is compliant with FATCA or other laws or
agreements related to FATCA) and provide each custodian or intermediary with any information,
forms, other documentation or consents that may be necessary for such custodian or intermediary to
make a payment free of FATCA withholding.

If an amount in respect of FATCA withholding tax were to be deducted or withheld from interest,
principal or other payments on the Notes, neither the Issuer nor the Guarantor nor any paying agent
nor any other person would, pursuant to the conditions of the Notes be required to pay additional
amounts as a result of the deduction or withholding of such tax. FATCA is particularly complex and
its application to the Notes remains unclear in certain respects. Holders of Notes should consult their
own tax advisers on how these rules may apply to payments they receive under the Notes.

Investors who purchase Bearer Notes in denominations that are not an integral multiple of the
Specified Denomination may be adversely affected if definitive Notes are subsequently required to be
issued




                                                52
      In relation to any issue of Notes which have denominations consisting of a minimum Specified
      Denomination plus one or more higher integral multiples of another smaller amount, it is possible
      that such Notes may be traded in amounts that are not integral multiples of such minimum Specified
      Denomination. Should definitive Notes be printed, a holder who, as a result of trading such amounts,
      holds an amount which is less than the minimum Specified Denomination in his account with the
      relevant clearing system at the relevant time may not receive a definitive Note in respect of such
      holding and would need to purchase a principal amount of Notes such that its holding amounts to a
      Specified Denomination.

      If such Notes in definitive form are issued, Noteholders should be aware that definitive Notes which
      have a denomination that is not an integral multiple of the minimum Specified Denomination may be
      illiquid and difficult to trade.

3.3   Risks relating to Interbolsa Notes

      Reliance upon Interbolsa procedures and Portuguese law

      Investments in Interbolsa Notes will be subject to Interbolsa procedures and Portuguese law with
      respect to the following:

      (a)     Form and Transfer of Interbolsa Notes

              Notes held through accounts of financial institutions, which are licensed to act as financial
              intermediaries and which are entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of
              their customers and which include any depository banks appointed by Euroclear and
              Clearstream, Luxembourg for the purpose of holding accounts on behalf of Euroclear and
              Clearstream, Luxembourg (each such institution an “Affiliate Member of Interbolsa”) will
              be represented in book-entry form (forma escritural) and can be either registered notes
              (nominativas) or bearer notes (ao portador) as specified in the applicable Final Terms.
              Interbolsa Notes shall not be issued in definitive form, whether in definitive bearer form or
              otherwise. Interbolsa Notes will be registered in the relevant issue account opened by the
              Issuer with Interbolsa and will be held in control accounts by the Affiliate Members of
              Interbolsa on behalf of the relevant Noteholders. Such control accounts will reflect at all
              times the aggregate number of Interbolsa Notes held in the individual securities accounts
              opened by the clients of the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa (which may include Euroclear
              and Clearstream, Luxembourg). The transfer of Interbolsa Notes and their beneficial
              interests will be made through Interbolsa.

      (b)     Payments on Interbolsa Notes

              All payments on Interbolsa Notes (including without limitation the payment of accrued
              interest and principal) will be made by the Issuer to the Portuguese Paying Agent and (i) if
              made in euro will be (a) credited, according to the procedures and regulations of Interbolsa,
              by the Portuguese Paying Agent to the payment current-accounts held in the payment system
              of the Bank of Portugal by the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa whose control accounts with
              Interbolsa are credited with such Notes and thereafter (b) credited by such Interbolsa
              Affiliate Members from the aforementioned payment current-accounts to the accounts of the
              Noteholders or through Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to the accounts with
              Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners of those Notes, in
              accordance with the rules and procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream,
              Luxembourg, as the case may be; (ii) if made in currencies other than euro will be (a)
              transferred, on the payment date and according to the procedures and regulations applicable
              by Interbolsa, from the account held by the Portuguese Paying Agent in the Foreign


                                                   53
      Currency Settlement System (Sistema de Liquidação em Moeda Estrangeira), managed by
      Caixa Geral de Depósitos, S.A., to the relevant accounts of the relevant Affiliate Members of
      Interbolsa, and thereafter (b) transferred by such Affiliate Members of Interbolsa from such
      relevant accounts to the accounts of the Noteholders of those Notes or through Euroclear and
      Clearstream, Luxembourg to the accounts with Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg of
      the beneficial owners of those Notes, in accordance with the rules and procedures of
      Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.

      The Issuer must provide Interbolsa with a prior notice of all payments in relation to the
      Interbolsa Notes and all necessary information for that purpose. In particular, such notice
      must contain:

      (a)     the identity of the Portuguese Paying Agent responsible for the relevant payment;
              and

      (b)     a statement of acceptance of such responsibility by the Portuguese Paying Agent.

      Interbolsa shall notify the Portuguese Paying Agent of the amounts to be settled, which
      Interbolsa calculates on the basis of the balances and on the tax rules governing the accounts
      of the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa.

      In the case of a partial payment, the amount held in the relevant current account of the
      Portuguese Paying Agent must be apportioned pro-rata between the accounts of the Affiliate
      Members of Interbolsa. After a payment has been processed, such process shall be
      confirmed to Interbolsa.

      The Noteholders must rely on the procedures of Interbolsa to receive payment under the
      Interbolsa Notes. The records relating to payments made in respect of beneficial interests in
      the Interbolsa Notes are maintained by the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa and the Issuer
      accepts no responsibility for, and will not be liable in respect of, the maintenance of such
      records.

(c)   Portuguese Tax Rules

      Pursuant to Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November, 2005, as amended from time to time,
      investment income paid to holders of Interbolsa Notes, and capital gains derived from a sale
      or other disposition of such Notes, will be exempt from Portuguese income tax only if
      certain documentation requirements are duly complied with.

      If the Notes are held in an account with an international clearing system (such as Euroclear
      or Clearstream, Luxembourg), the management entity of such clearing system may not
      provide the necessary registration services in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, and, therefore,
      to be eligible for the exemption, the holders of the Interbolsa Notes are required to submit to
      the management entity of the relevant clearing system, by courier, hand delivery or mail
      (there is no procedure for electronic filing), on an annual basis:

      (i)     a certificate with the name of each beneficial owner, address, tax payer number (if
              applicable), the identity of the securities, the quantity held and also the reference to
              the legislation supporting the exemption or the waiver of Portuguese withholding
              tax; or

      (ii)    a declaration that the beneficial owners are exempt from, or not subject to,
              Portuguese withholding tax.



                                            54
              The certificate and declaration are set out in “Taxation in Portugal” on page 202 hereto.

      The Issuer will not gross up payments in respect of any such withholding tax in any of the
      cases indicated in Condition 8 of the Interbolsa Notes, including failure to deliver or incorrect
      filling of the certificate or declaration referred to above. Accordingly, holders of Interbolsa
      Notes must seek their own advice to ensure that they comply with all procedures to ensure
      correct tax treatment of their Interbolsa Notes.

3.4   Risks related to the market generally

      Set out below is a brief description of the material market risks, including liquidity risk, exchange
      rate risk, interest rate risk and credit risk:

      An active secondary market in respect of the Notes may never be established or may be illiquid and
      this would adversely affect the value at which an investor could sell his Notes

      Notes may have no established trading market when issued, and one may never develop. If a market
      does develop, it may not be very liquid. Therefore, investors may not be able to sell their Notes
      easily or at prices that will provide them with a yield comparable to similar investments that have a
      developed secondary market. This is particularly the case for Notes that are especially sensitive to
      interest rate, currency or market risks, are designed for specific investment objectives or strategies or
      have been structured to meet the investment requirements of limited categories of investors. These
      types of Notes generally would have a more limited secondary market and more price volatility than
      conventional debt securities. Illiquidity may have a serverly adverse effect on the market.

      If an investor holds Notes which are not denominated in the investor's home currency, he will be
      exposed to movements in exchange rates that may adversely affect the value of his holding. In
      addition, the imposition of exchange controls in relation to any Notes could result in an investor not
      receiving payments on those Notes

      The Issuer will pay principal and interest on the Notes and the Guarantor will make any payments
      under the Guarantee in the Specified Currency. This presents certain risks relating to currency
      conversions if an investor’s financial activities are denominated principally in a currency or currency
      unit (the “Investor’s Currency”) other than the Specified Currency. These include the risk that
      exchange rates may significantly change (including changes due to devaluation of the Specified
      Currency or revaluation of the Investor’s Currency) and the risk that authorities with jurisdiction
      over the Investor’s Currency may impose or modify exchange controls. An appreciation in the value
      of the Investor’s Currency relative to the Specified Currency would decrease (1) the Investor’s
      Currency-equivalent yield on the Notes, (2) the Investor’s Currency-equivalent value of the principal
      payable on the Notes and (3) the Investor’s Currency-equivalent market value of the Notes.

      Government and monetary authorities may impose (as some have done in the past) exchange
      controls that could adversely affect an applicable exchange rate or the ability of the Issuer to make
      payments in respect of the Notes. As a result, investors may receive less interest or principal than
      expected, or no interest or principal.

      The value of Fixed Rate Notes may be adversely affected by movements in market interest rates

      Investment in Fixed Rate Notes involves the risk that if market interest rates subsequently increase
      above the rate paid on the Fixed Rate Notes, this will adversely affect the value of the Fixed Rate
      Notes.




                                                     55
Credit ratings assigned to the Notes may not reflect all the risks associated with an investment in
those Notes

One or more independent credit rating agencies may assign credit ratings to the Notes. The ratings
may not reflect the potential impact of all risks related to structure, market, additional factors
discussed above, and other factors that may affect the value of the Notes. A credit rating is not a
recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be revised, suspended or withdrawn by the
rating agency at any time.

In general, European regulated investors are restricted under Regulation (EC) No. 1060/2009 (the
“CRA Regulation”) from using credit ratings for regulatory purposes, unless such ratings are issued
by a credit rating agency established in the EU and registered under the CRA Regulation (and such
registration has not been withdrawn or suspended). Such general restriction will also apply in the
case of credit ratings issued by non-EU credit rating agencies, unless the relevant credit ratings are
endorsed by an EU-registered credit rating agency or the relevant non-EU rating agency is certified
in accordance with the CRA Regulation (and such endorsement action or certification, as the case
may be, has not been withdrawn or suspended). The list of registered and certified rating agencies
published by the European Securities and Markets Authority (“ESMA”) on its website in accordance
with the CRA Regulation is not conclusive evidence of the status of the relevant rating agency
included in such list, as there may be delays between certain supervisory measures being taken
against a relevant rating agency and the publication of the updated ESMA list. Certain information
with respect to the credit rating agencies and ratings is set out on the cover of this Prospectus.




                                             56
                         GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAMME

This General Description constitutes a general description of the Programme for the purposes of Article
22.5(3) of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 809/2004 implementing the Prospectus Directive.

Under the Programme, the Issuers may from time to time issue Notes denominated in any currency agreed
between the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer, subject as set out herein. A summary of the terms and
conditions of the Programme and the Notes is set out in the “Summary” above. The applicable terms of any
Notes will be agreed between the Issuer and the relevant Dealer prior to the issue of the Notes and will be set
out in the “Terms and Conditions of the Notes” endorsed on, attached to, or incorporated by reference into,
the Notes, as completed by Part A of the applicable Final Terms attached to, endorsed on or incorporated by
reference into such Notes, as more fully described under “Form of the Notes” below.

This Prospectus and any supplement to this Prospectus will only be valid for listing Notes on the Official
List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and their admission to trading on the regulated market of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange, or any other stock exchange in the European Economic Area, in an aggregate
nominal amount which, when added to the aggregate nominal amount then outstanding of all Notes
previously or simultaneously issued under the Programme, does not exceed €20,000,000,000 or its
equivalent in other currencies. For the purpose of calculating the euro equivalent of the aggregate nominal
amount of Notes issued under the Programme from time to time:

(a)     the euro equivalent of Notes denominated in another Specified Currency (as specified in the
        applicable Final Terms in relation to the relevant Notes, described under “Applicable Final Terms”)
        shall be determined, at the discretion of the Issuer, either as of the date on which agreement is
        reached for the issue of Notes or on the preceding day on which commercial banks and foreign
        exchange markets are open for general business in London and Lisbon, in each case on the basis of
        the spot rate for the sale of the euro against the purchase of such Specified Currency in the London
        foreign exchange market quoted by any leading international bank selected by the Issuer on the
        relevant day of calculation; and

(b)     the euro equivalent of Zero Coupon Notes (as specified in the applicable Final Terms in relation to
        the relevant Notes, described under “Form of the Notes”) and other Notes issued at a discount or a
        premium shall be calculated in the manner specified above by reference to the net proceeds received
        by the Issuer for the relevant issue.




                                                      57
                        DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

The following documents which have been filed with the CSSF shall be incorporated in, and form part of,
this Prospectus. Information contained in the documents incorporated by reference other than information
listed in the table below is given for information purposes only.

(a)    the section entitled “Terms and Conditions of the Notes (other than Undated Deeply Subordinated
       Notes)” from the previous base prospectuses relating to the Programme dated 7th December 2005,
       23rd February 2007, 18th January 2008, 18th February 2009, 18th December 2009, 3rd November
       2010, 4th November 2011 and 29th May 2012, respectively.

(b)    The press release of the Bank dated 7th May, 2013 entitled “Banco Espírito Santo Group Activity
       and Results in 1Q13” presenting the unaudited consolidated financial results for the three month
       period ended on 31st March, 2013, including:

       (i)     income statement (page 40) and;

       (ii)    balance sheet (page 39).

(c)    The auditors’ report and audited consolidated and non-consolidated annual financial statements of
       the Bank for the financial year ended 31st December, 2012, as set out on page 213 of the Bank’s
       2012 annual report including:

       (i)     statements of income (pages 100 and 101);

       (ii)    balance sheet (page 102);

       (iii)   statement of changes in equity (page 103);

       (iv)    cashflow statements (page 104);

       (v)     accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 110-212); and

       (vi)    auditors’ report (pages 213-215).

(d)    The auditors’ report and audited consolidated and non-consolidated annual financial statements of
       the Bank for the financial year ended 31st December, 2011, as set out on pages 98-203 of the Bank’s
       2011 annual report including:

       (i)     statements of income (pages 100, 101, 127 and 128);

       (ii)    balance sheet (pages 102, 129 and 130);

       (iii)   statement of changes in equity (page 103);

       (iv)    cashflow statements (page 104);

       (v)     accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 105-199); and

       (vi)    auditors’ report (pages 200-202).




                                                   58
(e)   The auditors’ report and audited annual financial statements of BES Finance for the financial year
      ended 31st December, 2012, as set out in BES Finance’s financial statements and notes to the
      financial statements for the year ended 31st December, 2012, including:

      (i)     income statement (pages 2 and 3);

      (ii)    balance sheet (page 4);

      (iii)   statement of changes in equity (page 5);

      (iv)    cashflow statements (page 6);

      (v)     accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 7 to 44); and

      (vi)    auditors’ report (pages 45 and 46).

(f)   The auditors’ report and audited annual financial statements of BES Finance for the financial year
      ended 31st December, 2011, as set out in BES Finance’s financial statements and notes to the
      financial statements for the year ended 31st December, 2011, including:

      (i)     income statement (pages 2 and 3);

      (ii)    balance sheet (page 4);

      (iii)   statement of changes in equity (page 5);

      (iv)    cashflow statements (page 6);

      (v)     accounting policies and explanatory notes (pages 7 to 44); and

      (vi)    auditors’ report (pages 45 and 46).

      For items (b) to (f) above, the information incorporated by reference that is not included in the cross-
      reference lists above is considered to be additional information that is not required by the relevant
      annexes of Commission Regulation (EC) No. 809/2004 of 29 April 2004.

      Following the publication of this Prospectus a supplement to this Prospectus may be prepared by the
      relevant Issuer and approved by the CSSF in accordance with Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.
      Statements contained in any such supplement to this Prospectus (or contained in any document
      incorporated by reference therein) shall, to the extent applicable, be deemed to modify or supersede
      statements contained in this Prospectus or in a document which is incorporated by reference in this
      Prospectus. Any statement so modified or superseded shall not, except as so modified or superseded,
      constitute a part of this Prospectus.

      Copies of documents incorporated by reference in this Prospectus can be obtained from the
      registered office of the relevant Issuer and from the specified office of the Paying Agent for the time
      being in Luxembourg.

      In addition, such documents will be published on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s web site
      (www.bourse.lu).

      BES Finance and the Bank will, in the event of any significant new factor, material mistake or
      inaccuracy relating to information included in this Prospectus which is capable of affecting the



                                                    59
assessment of any Notes, prepare a supplement to this Prospectus or publish a new Prospectus for
use in connection with any subsequent issue of Notes.




                                           60
                                      FORM OF THE NOTES

1.   Bearer Notes

     Each Tranche of Notes (not applicable to Interbolsa Notes) will be initially represented by a
     temporary global Note without interest coupons or talons, which on issue will:

     (i)     if the temporary global Note is intended to be issued in new global note (“NGN”) form, as
             stated in the applicable Final Terms, be delivered on or prior to the original issue date of the
             relevant Tranche to a common safekeeper (the “Common Safekeeper”) outside the United
             States for Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg; and

     (ii)    if the temporary global Note is not intended to be issued in NGN form, as stated in the
             applicable Final Terms, be delivered on or prior to the original issue date of the relevant
             Tranche to a common depositary (the “Common Depositary”) outside the United States for
             Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.

     Whilst any Note is represented by a temporary global Note, payments of principal and interest (if
     any) due prior to the Exchange Date (as defined below) will be made outside the United States
     (against presentation of the temporary global Note if the temporary global Note is not intended to be
     issued in NGN form) only to the extent that certification (in a form to be provided) to the effect that
     the beneficial owners of interests in such Note are not U.S. persons or persons who have purchased
     for resale to any U.S. person, as required by U.S. Treasury regulations, has been received by
     Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as
     applicable, has given a like certification (based on the certifications it has received) to the Agent.
     Any reference in this section “Form of the Notes” to Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg
     shall, whenever the context so permits, be deemed to include a reference to any additional or
     alternative clearing system approved by the Issuer, the Agent and the Trustee.

     On and after the date (the “Exchange Date”) which is 40 days after the date on which any temporary
     global Note is issued, interests in such temporary global Note unless otherwise specified in the
     applicable Final Terms or the temporary global Note will be exchangeable (free of charge) upon a
     request as described therein either for interests in a permanent global Note without interest coupons
     or talons or, subject to the following proviso, for definitive Notes with, where applicable, interest
     coupons and talons attached (as indicated in the applicable Final Terms and subject, in the case of
     definitive Notes, to such notice period as is specified in the applicable Final Terms) in each case
     against certification of beneficial ownership as described in the immediately preceding paragraph
     unless such certification has already been given; provided that a temporary global Note representing
     Notes having denominations consisting of a minimum Specified Denomination and one or more
     higher Specified Denominations which are not an integral amount of such minimum Specified
     Denomination may only be exchanged for definitive Notes upon an Exchange Event (as defined
     below). The holder of a temporary global Note will not be entitled to collect any payment of interest
     or principal due on or after the Exchange Date unless upon due certification exchange of the
     temporary global Note is improperly withheld or refused. Pursuant to the Principal Agency
     Agreement (as defined under “Terms and Conditions of the Notes” below) the Agent shall arrange
     that, where a further Tranche of Notes is issued, the Notes of such Tranche shall be assigned a
     common code and ISIN by Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg which are different from the
     common code and ISIN assigned to Notes of any other Tranche of the same Series until at least 40
     days (as notified by the Agent to the relevant Dealer) after the completion of the distribution of the
     Notes of such Tranche.




                                                   61
     Payments of principal and interest (if any) on a permanent global Note will be made through
     Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg (against presentation or surrender (as the case may be) of
     the permanent global Note if the permanent global Note is not intended to be issued in NGN form)
     without any requirement for certification. Unless otherwise specified in the applicable Final Terms, a
     permanent global Note will be exchangeable (free of charge), in whole but not in part, for definitive
     Notes with, where applicable, interest coupons and talons attached upon not less than 60 days’
     written notice to the Agent as described therein, save that a permanent global Note representing
     Notes having denominations consisting of a minimum Specified Denomination and one or more
     higher Specified Denominations which are not an integral multiple of such minimum Specified
     Denomination may only be exchanged for definitive Notes upon an Exchange Event. “Exchange
     Event” means that the Issuer and/or the Guarantor has been notified that both Euroclear and
     Clearstream, Luxembourg have been closed for business for a continuous period of 14 days (other
     than by reason of holiday, statutory or otherwise) or have announced an intention permanently to
     cease business or have in fact done so and no alternative clearance system satisfactory to the Trustee
     is available. The Issuer shall promptly give notice to the Noteholders in accordance with the Terms
     and Conditions if an Exchange Event occurs. Global Notes and definitive Notes will be issued
     pursuant to the Principal Agency Agreement.

     The following legend will appear on all bearer Notes which have an original maturity of more than
     one year and on all interest coupons and talons relating to such Notes:

     “Any United States person who holds this obligation will be subject to limitations under the United
     States income tax laws, including the limitations provided in sections 165(j) and 1287(a) of the
     Internal Revenue Code.”

2.   Interbolsa Notes

     Notes held through Interbolsa - Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas
     Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa”) (each an “Interbolsa Note”) will be
     represented in book-entry (“forma escritural”) form and can be either a registered Note
     (“nominativas”) or a bearer Note (“ao portador”), as specified in the applicable Final Terms.

     Title to Interbolsa Notes will be evidenced by book-entries in accordance with the Portuguese
     Securities Code and the regulations issued by Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários
     (Portuguese Securities Market Commission, the “CMVM”), by Interbolsa or otherwise applicable
     thereto. Each person shown in the book-entry records of a financial institution, which is licensed to
     act as a financial intermediary and which is entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on
     behalf of their customers and which includes any depository banks appointed by Euroclear and
     Clearstream, Luxembourg for the purpose of holding accounts on behalf of Euroclear and
     Clearstream, Luxembourg (each such institution an “Affiliate Member of Interbolsa”), as having an
     interest in the Interbolsa Notes shall be the holder of the principal amount of the Interbolsa Notes
     recorded.

     Title to the Interbolsa Notes is subject to compliance with all rules, restrictions and requirements
     applicable to the activities of Interbolsa and to Portuguese law.

     One or more certificates in relation to the Interbolsa Notes (each, a “Certificate”) will be delivered
     by the relevant financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual
     securities accounts in respect of a registered holding of Interbolsa Notes upon the request by the
     relevant Noteholder and in accordance with that financial intermediary’s procedures pursuant to
     article 78 of the Portuguese Securities Code.




                                                  62
The Interbolsa Notes will be registered in the relevant control issue account of the Issuer with
Interbolsa and will be held in control accounts by each Affiliate Member of Interbolsa on behalf of
the Noteholders. Such control accounts will reflect at all times the aggregate number of Interbolsa
Notes held in individual securities accounts opened with the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa by
Noteholders, which are clients of the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa and include Euroclear and
Clearstream, Luxembourg.

The person or entity registered in the relevant individual securities accounts of an Affiliate Member
of Interbolsa (the “Book-Entry Registry” and each such entry therein, a “Book Entry”) as the holder
of any Interbolsa Note shall (except as otherwise required by law) be treated as its absolute owner
for all purposes (whether or not it is overdue and regardless of any notice of ownership, trust or any
other interest therein).

The Issuer and the Paying Agents may (to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law) deem and
treat the person or entity registered in the Book-Entry Registry as the holder of any Interbolsa Note
and the absolute owner for all purposes. Proof of such registration is made by means of a Certificate
issued by the relevant financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual
securities accounts pursuant to article 78 of the Portuguese Securities Code.

No Noteholder will be able to transfer Interbolsa Notes, or any interest therein, except in accordance
with Portuguese law and regulations. Interbolsa Notes may only be transferred in accordance with
the applicable procedures established by the Portuguese Securities Code and the regulations issued
by the CMVM and Interbolsa.




                                             63
                                         APPLICABLE FINAL TERMS

Set out below is the form of Final Terms which will be completed for each Tranche of Notes issued under the
Programme with a denomination of less than €100,000 (or its equivalent in another currency).

[Date]

                       [BES FINANCE LTD./BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
         (acting through its [head office]/[Madeira branch]/ [Cayman Islands branch]/[London
                                     branch]/[Luxembourg branch])

                         Issue of [Aggregate Nominal Amount of Tranche] [Title of Notes]
                                    [Guaranteed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                        [acting through London branch]]2
                                             under the €20,000,000,000
                                      Euro Medium Term Note Programme

                                      PART A– CONTRACTUAL TERMS

Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the Terms and Conditions of the
Notes (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the Prospectus dated 17th July, 2013 [and the supplement to
the Prospectus dated [date]] which [together] constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes of the
Prospectus Directive (the “Prospectus”). This document constitutes the Final Terms of the Notes described
herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus Directive and must be read in conjunction with the
Prospectus. Full information on the Issuer[, the Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only available on the
basis of the combination of these Final Terms and the Prospectus. A summary of the Notes (which comprises
the summary in the Prospectus as amended to reflect the provisions of these Final Terms) is annexed to these
Final Terms. The Prospectus [and the supplement[s] to the Prospectus[es]] [has/have] been published on the
website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu) [and] [[is/are] available for viewing at
[address]].

The expression Prospectus Directive means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto, including the
2010 PD Amending Directive, to the extent implemented in the Relevant Member State) and includes any
relevant implementing measure in the Relevant Member State and the expression 2010 PD Amending
Directive means Directive 2010/73/EU.

[The following alternative language applies if the first tranche of an issue which is being increased was
issued under a Prospectus (or equivalent) with an earlier date.

Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the Terms and Conditions of the
Notes (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the Prospectus dated [original date] which are incorporated
by reference in the Prospectus dated [current date]. This document constitutes the Final Terms of the Notes
described herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus Directive and must be read in conjunction
with the Prospectus dated [current date] [and the supplement[s] to the Prospectus dated [date] [and [date]]]
which [together] constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes of the Prospectus Directive (the
“Prospectus”) including the Terms and Conditions incorporated by reference in the Prospectus. Full
information on the Issuer[, the Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only available on the basis of the
combination of these Final Terms and the Prospectus. A summary of the Notes (which comprises the
summary in the Prospectus as amended to reflect the provisions of these Final Terms) is annexed to these
Final Terms. Copies of the Prospectus [and the supplement[s] to the Prospectus] [has/have] been published


2
         Delete as appropriate.


                                                       64
on the website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu) [and] [[is] [are] available for viewing at
[address]].]

[Include whichever of the following apply or specify as “Not Applicable” (N/A). Note that the numbering
should remain as set out below, even if “Not Applicable” is indicated for individual paragraphs or
subparagraphs. Italics denote directions for completing the Final Terms.]

[In respect of Notes issued by BES Finance Ltd. which have a maturity of less than one year, the minimum
denomination may need to be £100,000 or its equivalent in any other currency.]


1.     (i)      Series Number:                      []

       (ii)     Tranche Number:                     []

       (iii)    Date on which the Notes will be     [Not Applicable]/[The Notes will be consolidated and
                consolidated and form a single      form a single series with [identify earlier Tranche(s)]
                Series:                             on [the Issue Date/exchange of the Temporary Global
                                                    Note for interests in the Permanent Global Note, as
                                                    referred to in paragraph 22(i) below, which is
                                                    expected to occur on or about [date].]

2.     Specified Currency or Currencies:            []

3.     Aggregate Nominal Amount

               Series:                             []

               Tranche:                            []

4.     Issue Price of Tranche:                      [] per cent. of the Aggregate Nominal Amount [plus
                                                    accrued interest from [insert date] (in the case of
                                                    fungible issues only, if applicable)]

5.     (i)      Specified Denominations:            [] [and intergral multiples of [] in excess thereof
                                                    up to and including []. No Notes in definitive form
                                                    will be issued with a denomination above []]

       (ii)     Calculation Amount:                 []

                                                    (If only one Specified Denomination, insert the
                                                    Specified Denomination. If more than one Specified
                                                    Denomination, insert the highest common factor.
                                                    Note, there must be a common factor in the case of
                                                    two or more Specified Denominations.)

6.     [(i)]    Issue Date:                         []

       [(ii)]   Interest Commencement Date:         []/[Issue Date]/[Not Applicable]

7.     Maturity Date:                               [Fixed rate - specify date/Floating rate where the
                                                    Interest Period and date(s) are adjusted or any other
                                                    rate where the Interest Period end date(s) are
                                                    adjusted - Interest Payment Date falling in or nearest


                                                    65
                                                    to [specify month and year] ]

8.    Interest Basis:                               [[] per cent. Fixed Rate]
                                                    [[ ] month [LIBOR/EURIBOR/[]]+/- [] per cent.
                                                    Floating Rate]
                                                    [Zero Coupon]
                                                    [[ ] per cent. Fixed Rate until [ ], then calculated in
                                                    accordance with paragraph 14 below]/[Reset Notes]
                                                    (further particulars specified below)

9.    Redemption Basis:                             Subject to any purchase and cancellation or early
                                                    redemption, the Notes will be redeemed on the
                                                    Maturity Date at [] per cent. of their nominal amount

10.   Change of Interest Basis:                     [Not Applicable/For the period from (and including)
                                                    the Interest Commencement Date, up to (but
                                                    excluding) [] paragraph [13/15] applies and for the
                                                    period from (and including) [], up to (and including)
                                                    the Maturity Date, paragraph [13/15] applies]

11.   Put/Call Options:                             [Investor Put]
                                                    [Issuer Call]
                                                    [Not Applicable]
                                                    (further particulars specified below)

12.   [(i)]    Status of the Notes:                 [Senior/Subordinated]

      [(ii)]   Status of the Guarantee:             [Senior/Subordinated]

      [(iii)   Date [Board] approval for issuance   [] [and [], respectively]]
               of Notes [and Guarantee] obtained:
                                                    (N.B. Only relevant where Board (or similar)
                                                    authorisation is required for the particular tranche of
                                                    Notes or related Guarantee)

PROVISIONS RELATING TO INTEREST (IF ANY) PAYABLE

13.   Fixed Rate Note Provisions                    [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                    (If  not    applicable, delete          the   remaining
                                                    sub-paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)      Rate[(s)] of Interest:               [] per cent. per annum [payable [annually/semi-
                                                    annually/ quarterly/other (specify)] in arrear] (If
                                                    payable other than annually, consider amending
                                                    [Condition 5(a) of the “Terms and Conditions of the
                                                    Notes”, if applicable)]

      (ii)     Interest Payment Date(s):            [[][ and []] in each year up to and including the
                                                    Maturity Date / [specify other]


      (iii)    Fixed Coupon Amount(s):              [] per Calculation Amount

      (iv)     Broken Amount(s):                    [[] per Calculation Amount, payable on the Interest


                                                    66
                                                  Payment Date falling [in/on] []/ Not Applicable]

      (v)      Day Count Fraction:                [Actual/Actual (ICMA)]/[30/360]/[Actual/365(Fixed)]

      (vi)     Determination Date(s):             [] in each year
                                                  [Insert interest payment dates except where there are
                                                  long or short periods. In these cases, insert regular
                                                  interest payment dates] (NB: Only relevant where Day
                                                  Count Fraction is Actual/Actual (ICMA))

14.   Reset Note Provisions:                      [Applicable/Not Applicable]

      (i)      Initial Rate of Interest:          [] per cent. per annum payable in arrear [on each
                                                  Interest Payment Date]

      (ii)     First Margin:                      [+/-][] per cent. per annum

      (iii)    Subsequent Margin:                 [[+/-][] per cent. per annum] [Not Applicable]

      (iv)     Interest Payment Date(s):          [] [and []] in each year up to and including the
                                                  Maturity Date

      (v)      Fixed Coupon Amount up to (but     [[] per Calculation Amount][Not Applicable]
               excluding) the First Reset Date:

      (vi)     Broken Amount(s):                  [[] per Calculation Amount payable on the Interest
                                                  Payment Date falling [in/on] []][Not Applicable]

      (vii)    First Reset Date:                  []

      (viii)   Second Reset Date:                 []/[Not Applicable]

      (ix)     Subsequent Reset Date(s):          [] [and []]

      (x)      Relevant Screen Page:              []

      (xi)     Mid-Swap Rate:                     [Single Mid-Swap Rate/Mean Mid-Swap Rate]

      (xii)    Mid-Swap Maturity                  []

      (xiii)   Day Count Fraction:                [30/360]/[Actual/Actual (ICMA)]/[Actual/365
                                                  (Fixed)]

      (xiv)    Determination Dates:               [] in each year



      (xv)     Business Centre(s):                []

      (xvi)    Calculation Agent:                 []

15.   Floating Rate Note Provisions               [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                  (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-
                                                  paragraphs of this paragraph)



                                                  67
(i)      Specified      Period(s)/Specified    []
         Interest Payment Dates:

(ii)     Business Day Convention:              [Floating Rate Convention/Following Business Day
                                               Convention/Modified Following Business Day
                                               Convention/ Preceding Business Day Convention]

(iii)    Additional Business Centre(s):        []

(iv)     Manner in which the Rate of           [Screen Rate Determination/ISDA Determination]
         Interest and Interest Amount is to
         be determined:

(v)      Party responsible for calculating     []
         the Rate of Interest and Interest
         Amount (if not the Agent):

(vi)     Screen Rate Determination:

               Reference Rate:                [     ] month [[currency] LIBOR / EURIBOR]

               Interest       Determination   [Second day on which commercial banks are open for
                Date(s):                       general business (including dealings in foreign
                                               exchange and foreign currency deposits) in London
                                               prior to the start of each Interest Period]

                                               [First day of each Interest Period]

                                               [Second day on which the TARGET 2 System is open
                                               prior to the start of each Interest Period]

               Relevant Screen Page:          []
                                               (In the case of EURIBOR, if not Reuters EURIBOR01
                                               ensure it is a page which shows a composite rate or
                                               amend the fallback provisions approximately)

(vii)    If ISDA Determination:

               Floating Rate Option:          []

               Designated Maturity:           []

               Reset Date:                    []

(viii)   Margin(s):                            [+/-] [] per cent. per annum

(ix)     Minimum Rate of Interest:             [] per cent. per annum

(x)      Maximum Rate of Interest:             [] per cent. per annum

(xi)     Day Count Fraction:                   [Actual/Actual (ISDA) or Actual/Actual
                                               Actual/365 (Fixed)
                                               Actual/365 (Sterling)


                                               68
                                                    Actual/360
                                                    30/360 or 360/360 or Bond Basis
                                                    30E/360 or Eurobond Basis
                                                    30E/360 (ISDA)
                                                    (see Condition 5(b)(iv) for alternatives)

16.   Zero Coupon Note Provisions                   [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-
                                                    paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)     Accrual Yield:                        [] per cent. per annum

      (ii)    Reference Price:                      []

      (iii)   Day Count Fraction in relation to     [30/360]
              Early Redemption amounts:             [Actual/360]
                                                    [Actual/365]

PROVISIONS RELATING TO REDEMPTION

17.   Notice periods for Condition 7(b):            Minimum period: [         ] days
                                                    Maximum period: [          ] days

18.   Issuer Call:                                  [Applicable/Not Applicable]

                                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-
                                                    paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)     Optional Redemption Date(s):          []

      (ii)    Optional Redemption Amount(s)         [[] per Calculation Amount/Sterling Make-Whole
              and method, if any, of calculating    Redemption Amount/Non-Sterling Make-Whole
              of such amount(s):                    Redemption Amount/Not Applicable]

      (iii)   Redemption Margin:                    [[    ] per cent./Not Applicable]

      (iv)    Reference Bond:                       [[    ]/ FA Selected Bond/Not Applicable]

      (v)     Quotation Time:                       [[    ]/Not Applicable]

      (vi)    If redeemable in part:

              (a)     Minimum          Redemption   []
                      Amount:

              (b)     Maximum          Redemption   []
                      Amount:

      (vii)   Notice period:                        Minimum period: [         ] days

                                                    Maximum period: [         ] days

19.   Investor Put:                                 [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-


                                                    69
                                                    paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)     Optional Redemption Date(s):          []

      (ii)    Optional Redemption Amount(s)         [] per Calculation Amount
              and method, if any, of calculating
              of such amount(s):

      (iii)   Notice period:                        Minimum period: [         ] days

                                                    Maximum period: [         ] days

20.   Final Redemption Amount:                      [] per Calculation Amount

21.   Early Redemption Amount(s) payable on         [As per Condition []/ [] per Calculation Amount]
      redemption for taxation reasons or on event
      of default:

GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE NOTES

22.   (i)     Form of Notes:                        [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for a
                                                    Permanent Global Note which is exchangeable for
                                                    Definitive Notes [on not less than 60 days’ notice
                                                    given at any time]/[only upon an Exchange Event].]
                                                    (This option is suitable for TEFRA D)

                                                    (The ‘exchange upon 60 days’ notice’ option should
                                                    not be expressed to be applicable if the Specified
                                                    Denomination in paragraph 5 includes language
                                                    substantially to the following effect: “[€100,000] and
                                                    integral multiples of [€1,000] in excess thereof up to
                                                    and including [€199,000].”)

                                                    [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for Definitive
                                                    Notes on and after the Exchange Date.] (This option is
                                                    suitable for TEFRA D)

                                                    [Permanent Global Note exchangeable for Definitive
                                                    Notes [on 60 days' notice given at any time/only upon
                                                    an Exchange Event]] (This option is suitable for
                                                    TEFRA C)

                                                    [Book-entry form registered Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]

                                                    [Book-entry form bearer Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]

      (ii)    New Global Note:                      [Yes/No]

23.   Additional Financial Centre(s):               [Not Applicable/[ ]]

                                                    (Note that this item relates to the place of payment and
                                                    not Interest Period end dates to which sub-paragraph
                                                    15(iii) relates)



                                                    70
24.         Talons for future Coupons to be attached to                       [Yes. As the Notes have more than 27 coupons
            Definitive Notes (and dates on which such                         payments, Talons may be required if, on exchange into
            Talons mature):                                                   definitive form, more than 27 coupon payments are
                                                                              still to be made]/[No]

THIRD PARTY INFORMATION

[Relevant third party information] has been extracted from [specify source]. [Each of the/The] Issuer [and
the Guarantor] confirm[s] that such information has been accurately reproduced and that, so far as it is aware
and is able to ascertain from information published by [specify source], no facts have been omitted which
would render the reproduced information inaccurate or misleading].


Signed on behalf of [ISSUER]:                                                      [Signed on behalf of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                                                                   (acting through its London branch)]

By: .......................................................................        By: ........................................................................
Duly authorised                                                                    Duly authorised




                                                                              71
                               PART B – OTHER INFORMATION


1.   LISTING AND ADMISSION TO TRADING

     Listing and admission to trading:                [Not Applicable]/[Application [has been/is expected
                                                      to be]made by the Issuer (or on its behalf) for the
                                                      Notes to be admitted to listing on the Official List of
                                                      the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and to trading on
                                                      the Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock
                                                      Exchange with effect from [].]

2.   RATINGS

     Ratings:                                         [The Notes to be issued [[have been]/[are expected to
                                                      be]] rated ]/[The following ratings reflect ratings
                                                      assigned to Notes of this type issued under the
                                                      Programme generally]:

                                                      [insert details]] by [insert the legal name of the
                                                      relevant credit rating agency entity(ies) and
                                                      associated defined terms].

                                                      [Each of [defined terms] is established in the
                                                      European Union and is registered under the
                                                      Regulation (EC) No. 1060/2009 (as amended) (the
                                                      CRA Regulation).]

                                                      [Need to include a brief explanation of the meaning
                                                      of the ratings if this has previously been published by
                                                      the rating provider.]

                                                      (The above disclosure should reflect the rating
                                                      allocated to Notes of the type being issued under the
                                                      Programme generally or, where the issue has been
                                                      specifically rated, that rating.)

3.   INTERESTS OF NATURAL AND LEGAL PERSONS INVOLVED IN THE ISSUE

     [Save for any fees payable to the [Managers/Dealers], so far as the Issuer is aware, no person
     involved in the issue of the Notes has an interest material to the offer. The [Managers/Dealers] and
     their affiliates have engaged, and may in the future engage, in investment banking and/or
     commercial banking transactions with, and may perform other services for, the Issuer and its
     affiliates in the ordinary course of business. - Amend as appropriate if there are other interests]

     [N.B. When adding any other description, consideration should be given as to whether such matters
     described constitute “significant new factors” and consequently trigger the need for a supplement to
     the Prospectus under Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive]

4.   REASONS FOR THE OFFER, ESTIMATED NET PROCEEDS AND TOTAL EXPENSES

     [(i)    Reasons for the offer              []



                                                 72
                                                    (See “Use of Proceeds” wording in Prospectus - if
                                                    reasons for offer different from making profit and/or
                                                    hedging certain risks will need to include those reasons
                                                    here.)]

     [(ii)]     Estimated net proceeds:             []

                                                    (If proceeds are intended for more than one use will
                                                    need to split out and present in order of priority. If
                                                    proceeds insufficient to fund all proposed uses state
                                                    amount and sources of other funding.)

     [(iii)     Estimated total expenses:           [] (Expenses are required to be broken down into each
                                                    principal intended “use” and presented in order of
                                                    priority of such “uses”).]

5.   YIELD (Fixed Rate Notes only)

     Indication of yield:                           []

                                                    Calculated as [include details of method of calculation in
                                                    summary form] on the Issue Date.]

6.   HISTORIC INTEREST RATES (Floating Rate Notes only)

     [Details of historic [LIBOR/EURIBOR] rates can be obtained from [Reuters].] [Not Applicable]

7.   OPERATIONAL INFORMATION

     (i)        ISIN Code:                          []

     (ii)       Common Code:                        []

     (iii)      Any clearing system(s) other        [Not Applicable/give name(s) and number(s)/LCH
                than Euroclear Bank S.A./N.V.       Clearnet, S.A., identification number [ ]* ]
                and     Clearstream    Banking,
                société anonyme and the
                relevant           identification
                number(s):

     (iv)       Delivery:                           Delivery [against/free of] payment

     (v)        Names and addresses of              []/[Not Applicable]
                additional Paying Agent(s) (if
                any):

     (vi)       Deemed delivery of clearing         Any notice delivered to Noteholders through the clearing
                system notices for; the purposes    systems will be deemed to have been given on the
                of Condition 14:                    [second] [business] day after the day on which it was
                                                    given to Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.


*
     For Interbolsa Notes only.


                                                     73
     (vii)   Intended to be held in a manner   [Yes. Note that the designation “Yes” simply means that
             which would allow Eurosystem      the Notes are intended upon issue to be deposited with
             eligibility:                      one of Euroclear Bank SA/NV and/or Clearstream
                                               Banking, société anonyme [(together, the “ICSDs”)] as
                                               common safe-keeper [(and registered in the name of a
                                               nominee of one of the ICSDs acting as common safe-
                                               keeper,][include this text for Registered Notes] and does
                                               not necessarily mean that the Notes will be recognised as
                                               eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy and
                                               intra day credit operations by the Eurosystem either upon
                                               issue or at any or all times during their life. Such
                                               recognition will depend upon the ECB being satisfied
                                               that Eurosystem eligibility criteria have been met.]

                                               [No. Whilst the designation is specified as “No” at the
                                               date of these Final Terms, should the Eurosystem
                                               eligibility criteria be amended in the future such that the
                                               Notes are capable of meeting them the Notes may then
                                               be deposited with one of Euroclear Bank SA/NV and/or
                                               Clearstream Banking, société anonyme [(together, the
                                               “ICSDs”)] as common safe-keeper [(and registered in the
                                               name of a nominee of one of the ICSDs acting as
                                               common safe-keeper,][include this text for Registered
                                               Notes]. Note that this does not necessarily mean that the
                                               Notes will then be recognised as eligible collateral for
                                               Eurosystem monetary policy and intra day credit
                                               operations by the Eurosystem at any time during their
                                               life. Such recognition will depend upon the ECB being
                                               satisfied that Eurosystem eligibility criteria have been
                                               met.]

                                               [Note that the designation “yes” simply means that the
                                               Notes are intended upon issue to be registered with
                                               Interbolsa – Socidade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação
                                               e de Sistemas Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários, S.A.
                                               in its capacity as a securities settlement system, and does
                                               not necessarily mean that the Notes will be recognised as
                                               eligible collateral for Eurosystem monetary policy and
                                               intra-day credit operations by the Eurosystem either
                                               upon issue or at any or all times during their life. Such
                                               recognition will depend upon satisfaction of the
                                               Eurosystem elibility creiteria.] [Inlcude this text if “yes”
                                               is selected and the Notes are Interbolsa Notes]




8.   DISTRIBUTION

     (i)     Method of distribution:           [Syndicated/Non-syndicated]

     (ii)    If syndicated, names and          [Not applicable/give details]
             addresses of Managers and

                                                 74
              underwriting commitments:

     (iii)    Date     of         Subscription     [Not applicable/give details]
              Agreement:

     (iv)     Stabilising Manager (if any):        [Not applicable/give details]

     (v)      If non-syndicated, name and          [Not Applicable/give name and address]
              address of relevant Dealer:

     (vi)     Total     commission           and   [    ] per cent. of the Aggregate Nominal Amount
              concession:

     (vii)    Non exempt Offer:                    [Not applicable] [An offer of the Notes may be made by
                                                   the Managers [, [insert names of financial intermediaries
                                                   receiving consent (specific consent)] (the Initial
                                                   Authorised Offerors)] [and any additional financial
                                                   intermediaries who have or obtain the Issuer's consent to
                                                   use the Prospectus in connection with the Non exempt
                                                   Offer and who are identified on the Bank's website at
                                                   www.bes.pt as an Authorised Offeror] (together [with
                                                   any financial intermediaries granted General Consent],
                                                   being persons to whom the issuer has given consent, the
                                                   Authorised Offerors) other than pursuant to Article 3(2)
                                                   of the Prospectus Directive in Portugal and Luxembourg
                                                   (the Public Offer Jurisdictions) during the period from
                                                   [specify date] until [specify date or a formula such as
                                                   "the Issue Date" or "the date which falls [ ] Business
                                                   Days thereafter"] (the Offer Period). See further
                                                   Paragraph 9.]

                                                   (N.B. Consider any local regulatory requirements
                                                   necessary to be fulfilled so as to be able to make a non-
                                                   exempt offer in relevant jurisdictions. No such offer
                                                   should be made in any relevant jurisdiction until those
                                                   requirements have been met. Non- exempt offers may
                                                   only be made into jurisdictions in which the base
                                                   prospectus (and any supplement) has been
                                                   notified/passported.)

     (viii)   General Consent:                     [Not Applicable][Applicable]

     (ix)     Other conditions to consent:         [Not Applicable][Add here any other conditions to which
                                                   the consent given is subject].

9.   TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE OFFER

     (Delete whole section if sub-paragraph 8(vii) above is specified to be Not Applicable because there
     is no Non exempt Offer)


     (i)      Offer Price:                         [Issue Price/Not applicable/specify]

     (ii)     Conditions to which the offer is     [Not applicable/give details]


                                                       75
         subject:

(iii)    Description of the application      [Not applicable/give details]
         process:

(iv)     Details of the minimum and/or       [Not applicable/give details]
         maximum         amount     of
         application:

(v)      Description of possibility to       [Not applicable/give details]
         reduce     subscriptions   and
         manner for refunding excess
         amount paid by applicants:

(vi)     Details of the method and time      [Not applicable/give details]
         limits for paying up and
         delivering the Notes:

(vii)    Manner in and date on which         [Not applicable/give details]
         results of the offer are to be
         made public:

(viii)   Procedure for exercise of any       [Not applicable/give details]
         right       of     pre-emption,
         negotiability of subscription
         rights    and   treatment    of
         subscription     rights     not
         exercised:

(ix)     Whether tranche(s) have been        [Not applicable/give details]
         reserved for certain countries:

(x)      Process for notification to         [Not applicable/give details]
         applicants of the amount
         allotted and the indication
         whether dealing may begin
         before notification is made:

(xi)     Amount of any expenses and          [Not applicable/give details]
         taxes specifically charged to the
         subscriber or purchaser:

(xii)    Name(s) and address(es), to he      The Authorised Offerors identified in paragraph 8 above.
         extent known to the Issuer, of
         the placers in the various
         countries where the offer takes
         place.




                                               76
                                      ANNEX

                              Summary of the Notes

[To be prepared for each issue of Notes with a denomination of less than EUR 100,000]




                                         77
                                         APPLICABLE FINAL TERMS

Set out below is the form of Final Terms which will be completed for each Tranche of Notes issued under the
Programme with a denomination of at least €100,000 (or its equivalent in another currency).

[Date]

                           [BES FINANCE LTD./BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A.
                              (acting through its [head office]/[Madeira branch]/
                       [Cayman Islands branch]/[London branch]/[Luxembourg branch])

                         Issue of [Aggregate Nominal Amount of Tranche] [Title of Notes]
                                    [Guaranteed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                        [acting through London branch]]3
                                            under the €20,000,000,000
                                      Euro Medium Term Note Programme

                                      PART A - CONTRACTUAL TERMS

[Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the Terms and Conditions of
the Notes (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the Prospectus dated 17th July, 2013 [and the
supplement(s) to it dated [date] [and [date]] which [together] constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes
of the Prospectus Directive (the “Prospectus”). This document constitutes the Final Terms of the Notes
described herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus Directive and must be read in conjunction
with the Prospectus. Full information on the Issuer [, the Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only
available on the basis of the combination of these Final Terms and the Prospectus. The Prospectus [and the
supplement[s] to the Prospectus] [has/have] been published on the website of the Luxembourg Stock
Exchange (www.bourse.lu) [and] [[is] [are] available for viewing at [address]].]

[The following alternative language applies if the first tranche of an issue which is being increased was
issued under a Prospectus (or equivalent) with an earlier date.

Terms used herein shall be deemed to be defined as such for the purposes of the Terms and Conditions of the
Notes (the “Terms and Conditions”) set forth in the Prospectus dated [original date] which are incorporated
by reference in the Prospectus dated [current date]. This document constitutes the Final Terms of the Notes
described herein for the purposes of Article 5.4 of the Prospectus Directive and must be read in conjunction
with the Prospectus dated [current date] [and the supplement[s] to the Prospectus dated [date] [and [date]]
which [together] constitute[s] a base prospectus for the purposes of the Prospectus Directive (the
“Prospectus”) including the Terms and Conditions incorporated by reference in the Prospectus. Full
information on the Issuer [, the Guarantor] and the offer of the Notes is only available on the basis of the
combination of these Final Terms and the Prospectus dated [current date] [as so supplemented]. Copies of
the Prospectus [and the supplement[s] to the Prospectus] [has/have] been published on the website of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu) [and] [[is/are] available for viewing at [address]].]

The expression “Prospectus Directive” means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto, including
the 2010 PD Amending Directive, to the extent implemented in the Relevant Member State) and includes
any relevant implementing measure in the Relevant Member State and the expression “2010 PD Amending
Directive” means Directive 2010/73/EU.




3
         Delete as appropriate.


                                                       78
[Include whichever of the following apply or specify as “Not Applicable” (N/A). Note that the numbering
should remain as set out below, even if “Not Applicable” is indicated for individual paragraphs or
subparagraphs. Italics denote directions for completing the Final Terms.]

[In respect of Notes issued by BES Finance Ltd. which have a maturity of less than one year, the minimum
denomination may need to be £100,000 or its equivalent in any other currency.]

1.     (i)     Series Number: []

       (ii)    Tranche Number:                     []

       (iii)   Date on which the Notes will be     [Not Applicable]/[The Notes will be consolidated and
               consolidated and form a single      form a single series with [identify earlier Tranche(s)]
               Series:                             on [the Issue Date/exchange of the Temporary Global
                                                   Note for interests in the Permanent Global Note, as
                                                   referred to in paragraph 22 below, which is expected
                                                   to occur on or about [date].]

2.     Specified Currency or Currencies:           []

3.     Aggregate Nominal Amount:

              Series:                             []

              Tranche:                            []

4.     Issue Price of Tranche:                     [] per cent. of the Aggregate Nominal Amount [plus
                                                   accrued interest from [insert date] (if applicable)]

5.     (i)     Specified Denominations:            [] [and integral multiples of [●] in excess thereof up
                                                   to and including [●]. No notes in definitive form will
                                                   be issued with a denomination above [●]]

                                                   (N.B. Notes must have a minimum denomination of
                                                   €100,000 (or equivalent) in order to benefit from the
                                                   wholesale exemption set out in Article 3.2(d) of the
                                                   Prospectus Directive.)

                                                   (Note - where multiple denominations above
                                                   [€100,000] or equivalent are being used the following
                                                   sample wording should be followed:

                                                   “[€100,000] and integral multiples of [€1,000] in
                                                   excess thereof up to and including [€199,000]. No
                                                   Notes in definitive form will be issued with a
                                                   denomination above [€199,000].”)

       (ii)    Calculation Amount:                 []

                                                   (If only one Specified Denomination, insert the
                                                   Specified Denomination. If more than one Specified
                                                   Denomination, insert the highest common factor.
                                                   Note, there must be a common factor in the case of
                                                   two or more Specified Denominations.)


                                                   79
6.    (i)        Issue Date:                          []

      (ii)       Interest Commencement Date:          []/[Issue Date]/[Not Applicable]

7.    Maturity Date:                                  [Fixed rate - specify date/Floating rate where the
                                                      Interest Period and date(s) are adjusted or any other
                                                      rate where the Interest Period end date(s) are
                                                      adjusted - Interest Payment Date falling in or nearest
                                                      to [specify month and year]]

8.    Interest Basis:                                 [[] per cent. Fixed Rate]
                                                      [[ ] month [LIBOR/EURIBOR]]+/- [] per cent.
                                                      Floating Rate]
                                                      [[ ] per cent. Fixed Rate until [ ], then calculated in
                                                      accordance with paragraph 14 below]/[Reset Notes]
                                                      [Zero Coupon]
                                                      (further particulars specified below)

9.    Redemption/Payment Basis:                       Subject to any purchase and cancellation or early
                                                      redemption, the Notes will be redeemed on the
                                                      Maturity Date at [] per cent. of their nominal amount

10.   Change of Interest Basis:                       [Not Applicable/For the period from (and including)
                                                      the Interest Commencement Date, up to (but
                                                      excluding) [] paragraph [13/15] applies and for the
                                                      period from (and including) [], up to (and including)
                                                      the Maturity Date, paragraph [13/15] applies]

11.   Put/Call Options:                               [Investor Put]
                                                      [Issuer Call]
                                                      [Not Applicable]
                                                      (further particulars specified below)

12.   [(i)]      Status of the Notes:                 [Senior/Subordinated]

      [(ii)      Status of the Guarantee:             [Senior/Subordinated]4

      [(iii)     Date [Board] approval for issuance   [] [and [], respectively]]
                 of Notes [and Guarantee] obtained:
                                                      (N.B. Only relevant where Board (or similar)
                                                      authorisation is required for the particular tranche of
                                                      Notes or related Guarantee)




4
      Delete as appropriate.


                                                      80
PROVISIONS RELATING TO INTEREST (IF ANY) PAYABLE

13.   Fixed Rate Note Provisions                  [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                  (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-
                                                  paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)      Rate[(s)] of Interest:             [] per cent. per annum payable in arrear [on each
                                                  Interest Payment Date]

      (ii)     Interest Payment Date(s):          [[] [ and []] in each year up to and including the
                                                  Maturity Date /[specify other]

      (iii)    Fixed Coupon Amount(s):            [] per Calculation Amount

      (iv)     Broken Amount(s):                  [[] per Calculation Amount, payable on the Interest
                                                  Payment Date falling [in/on] []/Not Applicable]

      (v)      Day Count Fraction:                [Actual/Actual (ICMA)] / [30/360] /[Actual/365
                                                  (Fixed)]

      (vi)     Determination Date(s):             [] in each year

14.   Reset Note Provisions                       [Applicable/Not Applicable]

      (i)      Initial Rate of Interest:          [] per cent. per annum payable in arrear [on each
                                                  Interest Payment Date]

      (ii)     First Margin:                      [+/-][] per cent. per annum

      (iii)    Subsequent Margin:                 [[+/-][] per cent. per annum] [Not Applicable]

      (iv)     Interest Payment Date(s):          [] [and []] in each year up to and including the
                                                  Maturity Date

      (v)      Fixed Coupon Amount up to (but     [[] per Calculation Amount][Not Applicable]
               excluding) the First Reset Date:

      (vi)     Broken Amount(s):                  [[] per Calculation Amount payable on the Interest
                                                  Payment Date falling [in/on] []][Not Applicable]

      (vii)    First Reset Date:                  []

      (viii)   Second Reset Date:                 []/[Not Applicable]

      (ix)     Subsequent Reset Date(s):          [] [and []]

      (x)      Relevant Screen Page:              []

      (xi)     Mid-Swap Rate:                     [Single Mid-Swap Rate/Mean Mid-Swap Rate]

      (xii)    Mid-Swap Maturity                  []

      (xiii)   Day Count Fraction:                [30/360]/[Actual/Actual (ICMA)]/[Actual/365
                                                  (Fixed)]

                                                  81
      (xiv)    Determination Dates:                  [] in each year

      (xv)     Business Centre(s):                   []

      (xvi)    Calculation Agent:                    []

15.   Floating Rate Note Provisions                  [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                     (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-
                                                     paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)      Specified Period(s)/ Specified        []
               Interest Payment Dates:

      (ii)     Business Day Convention:              [Floating Rate Convention/Following Business Day
                                                     Convention/Modified Following Business Day
                                                     Convention/ Preceding Business Day Convention]

      (iii)    Additional Business Centre(s):        []

      (iv)     Manner in which the Rate of           [Screen Rate Determination/ISDA Determination]
               Interest and Interest Amount is to
               be determined:

      (v)      Party responsible for calculating     []
               the Rate of Interest and Interest
               Amount (if not the Agent):

      (vi)     Screen Rate Determination:

                     Reference Rate:                [     ] month [[currency] LIBOR / EURIBOR]

                     Interest       Determination   [Second day on which commercial banks are open for
                      Date(s):                       general business (including dealings in foreign
                                                     exchange and foreign currency deposits) in London
                                                     prior to the start of each Interest Period]

                                                     [First day of each Interest Period]

                                                     [Second day on which the TARGET 2 System is open
                                                     prior to the start of each Interest Period]

                     Relevant Screen Page:          []

      (vii)    If ISDA Determination:

                     Floating Rate Option:          []

                     Designated Maturity:           []

                     Reset Date:                    []

      (viii)   Margin(s):                            [+/-] [] per cent. per annum



                                                     82
      (ix)    Minimum Rate of Interest:             [] per cent. per annum

      (x)     Maximum Rate of Interest:             [] per cent. per annum

      (xi)    Day Count Fraction:                   [Actual/Actual (ISDA) or Actual/Actual
                                                    Actual/365 (Fixed)
                                                    Actual/365 (Sterling)
                                                    Actual/360
                                                    30/360 or 360/360 or Bond Basis
                                                    30E/360 or Eurobond Basis
                                                    30E/360 (ISDA)]
                                                    (See 5(b)(iv) for alternatives)

16.   Zero Coupon Note Provisions                   [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-
                                                    paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)     Accrual Yield:                        [] per cent. per annum

      (ii)    Reference Price:                      []

      (iii)   Day Count Fraction in relation to     [30/360]
              Early Redemption amounts and          [Actual/360]
              late payment:                         [Actual/365]

PROVISIONS RELATING TO REDEMPTION

17.   Notice periods for Condition 7(b):            Minimum period: [      ] days

                                                    Maximum period: [         ] days

18.   Issuer Call:                                  [Applicable/Not Applicable]
                                                    (If not applicable, delete the remaining sub-
                                                    paragraphs of this paragraph)

      (i)     Optional Redemption Date(s):          []

      (ii)    Optional Redemption Amount(s)         [[] per Calculation Amount/Sterling Make-Whole
              and method, if any, of calculating    Redemption    Amount/Non-Sterling    Make-Whole
              of such amount(s):                    Redemption Amount/Not Applicable]

      (iii)   Redemption Margin:                    [[    ] per cent./Not Applicable]

      (iv)    Reference Bond:                       [[    ]/ FA Selected Bond/Not Applicable]

      (v)     Quotation Time:                       [[    ]/Not Applicable]

      (vi)    If redeemable in part:

              (a)     Minimum          Redemption   []
                      Amount:

              (b)     Maximum          Redemption   []


                                                    83
                      Amount:

      (vii)   Notice periods:                       Minimum period: [         ] days
                                                    Maximum period: [          ] days

19.   Investor Put:                                 [Applicable/Not Applicable]

      (i)     Optional Redemption Date(s):          []

      (ii)    Optional Redemption Amount:           [] per Calculation Amount

      (iii)   Notice period:                        Minimum period: [         ] days

                                                    Maximum period: [         ] days

20.   Final Redemption Amount:                      [] per Calculation Amount

21.   Early Redemption Amount(s) payable on         [As per Condition []/ [] per Calculation Amount]
      redemption for taxation reasons or on event
      of default:

GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO THE NOTES

22.   (i)     Form of Notes:                        [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for a
                                                    Permanent Global Note which is exchangeable for
                                                    Definitive Notes [on not less than 60 days’ notice
                                                    given at any time]/[only upon an Exchange Event].]
                                                    (This option is suitable for TEFRA D)

                                                    (The ‘exchange upon 60 days’ notice’ option should
                                                    not be expressed to be applicable if the Specified
                                                    Denomination in paragraph 5 includes language
                                                    substantially to the following effect: “[€100,000] and
                                                    integral multiples of [€1,000] in excess thereof up to
                                                    and including [€199,000].”)

                                                    [Temporary Global Note exchangeable for Definitive
                                                    Notes on and after the Exchange Date.] (This option is
                                                    suitable for TEFRA D)

                                                    [Permanent Global Note exchangeable for Definitive
                                                    Notes [on 60 days' notice given at any time/only upon
                                                    an Exchange Event]] (This option is suitable for
                                                    TEFRA C)

                                                    [Book-entry form registered Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]

                                                    [Book-entry form bearer Notes (Interbolsa Notes)]

      (ii)    New Global Note:                      [Yes/No]

23.   Additional Financial Centre(s):               [Not Applicable/[    ]]

                                                    (Note that this item relates to the place of payment and


                                                    84
                                                                             not Interest Period end dates to which sub-paragraph
                                                                             15(iii) relates)

24.         Talons for future Coupons to be attached                         [Yes, as the Notes have more than 27 coupon
            to Definitive Notes:                                             payments, Talons may be required if, on exchange into
                                                                             definitive form, more than 27 coupon payments are
                                                                             still to be made]/[No]

25.         U.S. Selling Restrictions:                                       [Reg.S Compliance Category 2; TEFRA C/TEFRA
                                                                             D/TEFRA not applicable]

THIRD PARTY INFORMATION

[[Relevant third party information] has been extracted from [specify source]. [Each of the/The] Issuer [and
the Guarantor] confirm[s] that such information has been accurately reproduced and that, so far as it is aware
and is able to ascertain from information published by [specify source], no facts have been omitted which
would render the reproduced information inaccurate or misleading]

By: ......................................................................   By: ........................................................................

Duly authorised                                                              Duly authorised




                                                                             85
                               PART B – OTHER INFORMATION


1.   LISTING AND ADMISSION TO TRADING

     (i)     Listing and admission to trading:     [Not Applicable]/[Application [has been/is expected to
                                                   be] made by the Issuer (or on its behalf) for the Notes
                                                   to be admitted to listing on the Official List of the
                                                   Luxembourg Stock Exchange and to trading on the
                                                   Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
                                                   with effect from [].]

     (ii)    Estimate of total expenses relating   []
             to admission to trading:

2.   RATINGS

     Ratings:                                      [The Notes to be issued [[have been]/[are expected to
                                                   be]] rated]/[The following ratings reflect ratings
                                                   assigned to Notes of this type issued under the
                                                   Programme generally]:

                                                   [insert details]] by [insert the legal name of the
                                                   relevant credit rating agency entity(ies) and associated
                                                   defined terms].

                                                   [Each of [defined terms] is established in the European
                                                   Union and is registered under the Regulation (EC) No.
                                                   1060/2009 (as amended) (the CRA Regulation).]

                                                   (The above disclosure should reflect the rating
                                                   allocated to Notes issued under the Programme
                                                   generally or, where the issue has been specifically
                                                   rated, that rating.)

3.   INTERESTS OF NATURAL AND LEGAL PERSONS INVOLVED IN THE ISSUE

     [Save for any fees payable to the [Managers/Dealers], so far as the Bank is aware, no person
     involved in the issue of the Notes has an interest material to the offer. The [Managers/Dealers] and
     their affiliates have engaged, and may in the future engage, in investment banking and/or
     commercial banking transactions with, and may perform other services for, the Issuer and its
     affiliates in the ordinary course of business. – Amend as appropriate if there are other interests]

     [When adding any other description, consideration should be given as to whether such matters
     described constitute “significant new factors” and consequently trigger the need for a supplement to
     the Prospectus under Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive]

4.   YIELD (Fixed Rate Notes only)

     Indication of yield:                          []/[Not Applicable]




                                                   86
5.   HISTORIC INTEREST RATES (Floating Rate Notes only)

     [Details of historic [LIBOR/EURIBOR] rates can be obtained from [Reuters].] [Not Applicable]

6.   OPERATIONAL INFORMATION

     (i)        ISIN Code:                           []

     (ii)       Common Code:                         []

     (iii)      Any clearing system(s) other than    [Not Applicable/give name(s) and number(s)/LCH
                Euroclear Bank S.A./ N.V. and        Clearnet, S.A., identification number [ ]*]
                Clearstream Banking, société
                anonyme and the relevant
                identification number(s):

     (iv)       Delivery:                            Delivery [against/free of] payment

     (v)        Names     and    addresses of        []/[Not Applicable]
                additional Paying Agent(s) (if
                any):

     (vi)       Deemed delivery of clearing          Any notice delivered to Noteholders through the
                system notices for the purposes of   clearing systems will be deemed to have been given on
                Condition 14:                        the [second] [business] day after the day on which it
                                                     was given to Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.

     (vii)      Intended to be held in a manner      [[Yes. Note that the designation “Yes” simply means
                which would allow Eurosystem         that the Notes are intended upon issue to be deposited
                eligibility:                         with one of Euroclear Bank SA/NV and/or Clearstream
                                                     Banking, société anonyme [(together, the “ICSDs”)] as
                                                     common safe-keeper and does not necessarily mean
                                                     that the Notes will be recognised as eligible collateral
                                                     for Eurosystem monetary policy and intra day credit
                                                     operations by the Eurosystem either upon issue or at
                                                     any or all times during their life. Such recognition will
                                                     depend upon the ECB being satisfied that Eurosystem
                                                     eligibility criteria have been met.]

                                                     [No. Whilst the designation is specified as “No” at the
                                                     date of these Final Terms, should the Eurosystem
                                                     eligibility criteria be amended in the future such that
                                                     the Notes are capable of meeting them the Notes may
                                                     then be deposited with one of Euroclear Bank SA/NV
                                                     and/or Clearstream Banking, société anonyme
                                                     [(together, the “ICSDs”)] as common safe-keeper.
                                                     Note that this does not necessarily mean that the Notes
                                                     will then be recognised as eligible collateral for
                                                     Eurosystem monetary policy and intra day credit
                                                     operations by the Eurosystem at any time during their
                                                     life. Such recognition will depend upon the ECB being

*
     For Interbolsa Notes only.


                                                     87
                                                   satisfied that Eurosystem eligibility criteria have been
                                                   met.]

                                                   [Note that the designation “yes” simply means that the
                                                   Notes are intended upon issue to be registered with
                                                   Interbolsa – Socidade Gestora de Sistemas de
                                                   Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados de Valores
                                                   Mobiliários, S.A. in its capacity as a securities
                                                   settlement system, and does not necessarily mean that
                                                   the Notes will be recognised as eligible collateral for
                                                   Eurosystem monetary policy and intra-day credit
                                                   operations by the Eurosystem either upon issue or at
                                                   any or all times during their life. Such recognition will
                                                   depend upon satisfaction of the Eurosystem elibility
                                                   creiteria.] [Inlcude this text if “yes” is selected and the
                                                   Notes are Interbolsa Notes]

7.   DISTRIBUTION:

     (i)     Method of distribution:               [Syndicated/Non-syndicated]

     (ii)    If   syndicated,  names         and   [Not Applicable/give names]
             addresses of Managers           and
             underwriting commitments:

     (iii)   Date of Subscription Agreement:       [    ]

     (iv)    Stabilising Manager (if any):         [Not Applicable/give name]

     (v)     If non-syndicated, name         and   [Not Applicable/give name]
             address of relevant Dealer:




                                                   88
                               TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES

The following are the Terms and Conditions of the Notes which will be incorporated by reference into each
Note cleared by LCH Clearnet, S.A. the clearing system operated at Interbolsa - Sociedade Gestora de
Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários S.A., each global Note and each
definitive Note, in the latter case only if permitted by the rules of the relevant stock exchange or other
relevant authority (if any) and agreed by the relevant Issuer and the relevant Dealer at the time of issue. If
not so permitted and agreed, such definitive Note will have endorsed thereon or attached thereto such Terms
and Conditions. The applicable Final Terms in relation to any Tranche of Notes may specify other
information which shall, to the extent so specified, complete the following Terms and Conditions for the
purpose of such Notes. The applicable Final Terms (or the relevant provisions thereof) will be endorsed
upon, or attached to, each temporary global Note, permanent global Note and definitive Note and will be
incorporated into and applicable to each Interbolsa Note (as defined below). Reference should be made to
“Form of the Notes” above for the form of the Final Terms which will include the definitions of certain terms
used in the following Terms and Conditions or specify which of such terms are to apply in relation to the
relevant Notes.

This Note is one of a Series (as defined below) of Notes issued by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (the “Bank”),
or BES Finance Ltd. (“BES Finance” and, together with the Bank in its capacity as an issuer of Notes, the
“Issuers” and each an “Issuer”) as specified in the applicable Final Terms constituted, except in the case of
Interbolsa Notes (as defined below), by a Trust Deed dated 3rd February, 1997 (such Trust Deed as modified
and/or supplemented and/or restated from time to time, the “Trust Deed”) made between the Issuers, the
Bank in its capacity as guarantor of Notes issued by BES Finance (in such capacity, the “Guarantor”) and
The Bank of New York Mellon (formerly J.P. Morgan Trustee and Depositary Company Limited and Chase
Manhattan Trustees Limited) (the “Trustee”, which expression shall wherever the context permits include all
other persons or companies for the time being acting as trustee under the Trust Deed). Interbolsa Notes are
constituted by entries in the individual securities accounts opened by Noteholders with the Affiliate
Members of Interbolsa (as defined below).

References herein to the “Notes” shall be references to the Notes of this Series and shall mean:

(i)     in relation to any Notes represented by a global Note, units of each Specified Denomination in the
        Specified Currency;

(ii)    definitive Notes issued in exchange for a global Note;

(iii)   any global Note; and

(iv)    Notes held through Interbolsa - Sociedade Gestora de Sistemas de Liquidação e de Sistemas
        Centralizados de Valores Mobiliários, S.A. (“Interbolsa”) (each an “Interbolsa Note”). Interbolsa
        Notes will only be issued by the Bank acting through its head office, and will not be issued by BES
        Finance.

References herein to “the Issuer” shall be to whichever of the Bank or BES Finance is specified as the Issuer
in the applicable Final Terms.

The Notes (other than Interbolsa Notes) and the Coupons (as defined below) also have the benefit of an
amended and restated Agency Agreement (the “Principal Agency Agreement”) dated 17th July, 2013 made
among the Issuers, the Guarantor, the Trustee, The Bank of New York Mellon (formerly JPMorgan Chase
Bank, N.A.) as issuing and principal paying agent and agent bank (the “Agent”, which expression shall
include any successor agent specified in the applicable Final Terms) and the other paying agents named
therein. The Interbolsa Notes have the benefit of the Principal Agency Agreement, as amended by an
amendment agreement (the “Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement”) dated 17th July, 2013 made among the

                                                      89
Bank, the Common Representative, the Agent, the Bank acting through its head office acting as paying agent
in Portugal (the “Portuguese Paying Agent” which expression shall include any successor Portuguese Paying
Agent) and the other paying agents named therein (together with the Agent, the Portuguese Paying Agent
and the other paying agents named in the Principal Agency Agreement, the “Paying Agents”, which
expression shall include any additional or successor paying agents) and of the common representative
appointment agreement dated 17 July, 2013 such agreement as amended and/or supplemented and/or restated
from time to time (the “Common Representative Appointment Agreement”) made between the Bank, as
issuer, and Vieira de Almeida & Associados - Sociedade de Advogados R.L., as common representative of
the holders of Interbolsa Notes (representante comum dos obrigacionistas) (the “Common Representative”).

Interest bearing definitive Notes (unless otherwise indicated in the applicable Final Terms) have interest
coupons (“Coupons”) and in the case of Notes which, when issued in definitive form, have more than 27
interest payments remaining, talons for further Coupons (“Talons”) attached on issue. Any reference herein
to Coupons or coupons shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be deemed to include a reference to
Talons or talons. Neither Interbolsa Notes nor global Notes have Coupons or Talons attached on issue.

The Final Terms for this Note (or the relevant provisions thereof) are set out in Part A of the Final Terms
attached to, endorsed on or incorporated into this Note which complete these Terms and Conditions for the
purposes of this Note. References herein to the “applicable Final Terms” are to Part A of the Final Terms (or
the relevant provisions thereof) attached to, endorsed on or incorporated into this Note.

The applicable Final Terms will state whether this Note is (i) a senior Note issued by BES Finance or the
Bank and, where the Issuer is BES Finance, that such Note is guaranteed on an unsubordinated basis by the
Bank, acting through its London branch, as described in Condition 4(i) (a “Senior Note”) or (ii) a dated
subordinated Note issued by BES Finance or the Bank and, where the Issuer is BES Finance, guaranteed on a
subordinated basis by the Bank, acting through its London branch, as described in Condition 4(ii)) (a
“Subordinated Note”). In each case, where a Note is issued by the Bank, the applicable Final Terms will state
whether such Note is being issued by the Bank through its head office, its Madeira branch or its Cayman
Islands branch or its London branch or its Luxembourg branch.

Any reference to “Noteholders” or “holders” in relation to any Notes shall mean (i) in the case of bearer
Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the holders of the global Notes and definitive Notes and shall, in relation
to any Notes represented by a global Note, be construed as provided below or (ii) in the case of Interbolsa
Notes, each person shown in the book-entry records of a financial institution, which is licensed to act as a
financial intermediary under the Portuguese Securities Code (“Código dos Valores Mobiliários”) (the
“Portuguese Securities Code”) and which is entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on behalf of
their customers (and includes any depositary banks appointed by Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg
for the purpose of holding accounts on behalf of Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg) (each such
institution an “Affiliate Member of Interbolsa”), as having an interest in the principal amount of the
Interbolsa Notes. Any reference herein to “Couponholders” shall mean the holders of the Coupons and shall,
unless the context otherwise requires, include the holders of the Talons.

The Trustee acts for the benefit of the holders of the Notes, other than Interbolsa Notes, and for the
Couponholders, all in accordance with the provisions of the Trust Deed. The holders of Interbolsa Notes
shall at all times be entitled, by means of an Extraordinary Resolution, to appoint and dismiss a Common
Representative to act as their common representative, as further described in Condition 22.

As used herein, “Tranche” means Notes which are identical in all respects (including as to listing and
admission to trading) and “Series” means a Tranche of Notes together with any further Tranche or Tranches
of Notes which are (i) expressed to be consolidated and form a single series and (ii) identical in all respects
(including as to listing and admission to trading) except for their respective Issue Dates, Interest
Commencement Dates and/or Issue Prices.



                                                      90
Copies of the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement, the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and the
Common Representative Appointment Agreement are available for inspection at the specified office of each
of the Trustee (being as at 17th July, 2013 at One Canada Square, London E14 5AL), the Agent and the
Paying Agents. If the Notes are to be listed on the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange or
admitted to trading on the regulated market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange, the applicable Final Terms
will be published on the website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu). In the case of bearer
Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Noteholders and the Couponholders are deemed to have notice of, and
are entitled to the benefit of, all the provisions of the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement and the
applicable Final Terms which are applicable to them. In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the Noteholders are
deemed to have notice of, and are entitled to the benefit of, all the provisions of the Principal Agency
Agreement, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and the applicable Final
Terms which are applicable to them.

Words and expressions defined in the Trust Deed or the Principal Agency Agreement or used in the
applicable Final Terms shall have the same meanings where used in these Terms and Conditions unless the
context otherwise requires or unless otherwise stated and provided that, in the event of inconsistency
between the Trust Deed and the Principal Agency Agreement, the Principal Agency Agreement will prevail
in respect of Interbolsa Notes and the Trust Deed will prevail in all other cases and, in the event of
inconsistency between the Trust Deed or the Principal Agency Agreement and the applicable Final Terms,
the applicable Final Terms will prevail.

Where the Bank is acting as an Issuer through its head office or its Madeira branch or its Cayman Islands
branch or its London branch or its Luxembourg branch in relation to the relevant Notes as specified in the
applicable Final Terms, all references in these Terms and Conditions to the Bank shall be deemed to be
references to the Bank acting through its head office or the branch specified therein. Where the Bank is
acting as Guarantor in relation to Notes issued by BES Finance, as indicated in the applicable Final Terms,
all references in these Terms and Conditions to the Bank shall be deemed to be references to the Bank acting
through its London branch.

1.      Form, Denomination, Title and Transfer

        The Notes other than Interbolsa Notes are in bearer form. Interbolsa Notes are in book-entry form
        (forma escritural) and can be either registered Notes (nominativas) (in which case Interbolsa, at the
        Issuer’s request can ask the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for information regarding the identity of
        the Noteholders and transmit such information to the Issuer) or bearer Notes (ao portador) (in which
        case Interbolsa cannot inform the Issuer of the identity of the Noteholders), as specified in the
        applicable Final Terms. Definitive Notes shall be serially numbered, and in the currency (the
        “Specified Currency”) and the denomination(s) (the “Specified Denomination(s)”) specified in the
        applicable Final Terms. Notes of one Specified Denomination may not be exchanged for Notes of
        another Specified Denomination.

        This Note is a Senior Note or a Subordinated Note, as indicated in the applicable Final Terms.

        This Note may (i) bear interest calculated by reference to one or more fixed rates of interest (such
        Note, a “Fixed Rate Note”), (ii) bear interest calculated by reference to, in the case of an initial
        period, an initial fixed rate of interest and, thereafter, the applicable fixed rate of interest that has
        been determined pursuant to the reset provisions contained in these Terms and Conditions, by
        reference to a mid swap rate for the Specified Currency (such Note, a “Reset Note”), (iii) bear
        interest calculated by reference to one or more floating rates of interest (such Note, a “Floating Rate
        Note”), (iv) be issued on a non-interest bearing basis and be offered and sold at a discount to its
        nominal amount (such Note, a “Zero Coupon Note”) or (v) be a combination of any of the foregoing,
        depending upon the Interest Basis shown in the applicable Final Terms.



                                                       91
Definitive Notes are issued with Coupons attached, and if applicable Talons for further Coupons
unless they are Zero Coupon Notes in which case references to interest (other than in relation to
interest due after the Maturity Date), Coupons and Couponholders in these Terms and Conditions are
not applicable.

Subject as set out below, title to the Notes (except Interbolsa Notes) and Coupons will pass by
delivery. The Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Trustee and any Paying Agent
may deem and treat the bearer of any such Note or Coupon as the absolute owner thereof (whether or
not overdue and notwithstanding any notice of ownership or writing thereon or notice of any
previous loss or theft thereof) for all purposes but, in the case of any global Note, without prejudice
to the provisions set out in the next succeeding paragraph.

For so long as any of the Notes is represented by a global Note (including Notes issued in new global
note (“NGN”) form, as specified in the applicable Final Terms) held on behalf of Euroclear S.A./
N.V. (“Euroclear”) and/or Clearstream Banking, société anonyme (“Clearstream, Luxembourg”)
each person (other than Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg) who is for the time being shown in
the records of Euroclear or of Clearstream, Luxembourg as the holder of a particular nominal amount
of such Notes (in which regard any certificate or other document issued by Euroclear or Clearstream,
Luxembourg as to the nominal amount of such Notes standing to the account of any person shall be
conclusive and binding for all purposes save in the case of manifest error) shall be treated by the
Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Trustee and any Paying Agent as the holder
of such nominal amount of such Notes for all purposes other than with respect to the payment of
principal or interest on the Notes, for which purpose the bearer of the relevant global Note shall be
treated by the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Trustee and any Paying Agent
as the holder of such nominal amount of such Notes in accordance with and subject to the terms of
the relevant global Note and the Trust Deed and the expressions “Noteholder” and “holder of Notes”
and related expressions shall be construed accordingly. Notes which are represented by a global Note
will be transferable only in accordance with the rules and procedures for the time being of Euroclear
or of Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.

References to Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Interbolsa shall, whenever the
context so permits, be deemed to include a reference to any additional or alternative clearing system
approved by the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Trustee (except in respect of
references to Interbolsa), the Common Representative (in respect of references to Interbolsa only)
and the Agent or specified in the applicable Final Terms.

Title to the Interbolsa Notes will be evidenced by book-entries in accordance with the Portuguese
Securities Code and the regulations issued by Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliârios
(Portuguese Securities Market Commission, the “CMVM”), by Interbolsa or otherwise applicable
thereto. Each person shown in the book-entry records of financial institutions, which are licensed to
act as financial intermediaries and which are entitled to hold control accounts with Interbolsa on
behalf of their customers and which include any depository banks appointed by Euroclear and
Clearstream, Luxembourg for the purpose of holding accounts on behalf of Euroclear and
Clearstream, Luxembourg (each such institution an “Affiliate Member of Interbolsa”), as having an
interest in the Interbolsa Notes shall be the holder of the principal amount of the Interbolsa Notes
recorded.

Title to the Interbolsa Notes is subject to compliance with all rules, restrictions and requirements
applicable to the activities of Interbolsa.

One or more certificates in relation to the Interbolsa Notes (each, a “Certificate”) will be delivered
by the relevant financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual
securities accounts in respect of a registered holding of Interbolsa Notes upon the request by the


                                              92
       relevant Noteholder and in accordance with that financial intermediary’s procedures pursuant to
       article 78 of the Portuguese Securities Code.

       The Interbolsa Notes will be registered in the relevant control issue account of the Issuer with
       Interbolsa and will be held in control accounts by each Affiliate Member of Interbolsa on behalf of
       the Noteholders. Such control accounts will reflect at all times the aggregate number of Interbolsa
       Notes held in individual securities accounts opened with the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa by
       Noteholders, which are clients of the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa and include Euroclear and
       Clearstream, Luxembourg.

       The person or entity registered in the relevant individual securities accounts of an Affiliate Member
       of Interbolsa book-entry registry of the Central de Valores Mobiliários (the “Book-Entry Registry”
       and each such entry therein, a “Book Entry”) as the holder of any Interbolsa Note shall (except as
       otherwise required by law) be treated as its absolute owner for all purposes (whether or not it is
       overdue and regardless of any notice of ownership, trust or any other interest therein).

       The Issuer and the Paying Agents may (to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law) deem and
       treat the person or entity registered in the Book-Entry Registry as the holder of any Interbolsa Note
       and the absolute owner for all purposes. Proof of such registration is made by means of a Certificate
       issued by the relevant financial intermediary through which Interbolsa Notes are held in individual
       securities accounts pursuant to article 78 of the Portuguese Securities Code.

       No Noteholder will be able to transfer Interbolsa Notes, or any interest therein, except in accordance
       with Portuguese law and regulations. Interbolsa Notes may only be transferred in accordance with
       the applicable procedures established by the Portuguese Securities Code and the regulations issued
       by the CMVM and Interbolsa.

2.     Status of the Notes

(i)    The Senior Notes and any relative Coupons are direct, unconditional, unsecured (subject A to the
       provisions of Condition 3) and unsubordinated obligations of the Issuer and rank and will rank pari
       passu with all present and future unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Issuer, without
       any preference among themselves by reason of priority of date of issue, currency of payment or
       otherwise, except for obligations given priority by law.

(ii)   Subordinated Notes and any relative Coupons are direct, unsecured obligations of the Issuer and rank
       and will rank pari passu among themselves and at least par passu with all other present and future
       dated subordinated obligations of the Issuer, save for those that have been accorded by law
       preferential rights.

       In the event of the insolvency or winding up of the Issuer, the claims of the holders of the
       Subordinated Notes and any relative Coupons against the Issuer will be subordinated in right of
       payment to the claims of depositors and all other unsecured creditors (other than holders of
       Subordinated Indebtedness, if any) of the Issuer.

       “Subordinated Indebtedness” means all indebtedness of the Issuer under the terms of which the right
       to payment of the person(s) entitled thereto is, or is expressed to be, subordinated, in the event of the
       winding up of the Issuer, to the right to payment of all unsubordinated creditors of the Issuer and so
       that for the purpose of this definition indebtedness shall include all liabilities, whether actual or
       contingent, under guarantees or indemnities.

       In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous proceedings of the Issuer, no holder of
       Subordinated Notes (having a debt or a liability towards the Issuer) may exercise any set-off or other
       similar rights against any amounts held by the Issuer.

                                                      93
3.   Negative Pledge

     This Condition 3 shall apply only to Senior Notes and references to “Notes” shall be construed
     accordingly.

     So long as any of the Notes remains outstanding (as defined in the Trust Deed or, in respect of
     Interbolsa Notes, as defined in the Principal Agency Agreement, as amended by the Interbolsa Notes
     Agency Agreement), neither the Issuer nor the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall create
     or permit to be outstanding any mortgage, charge, lien, pledge or other similar encumbrance or
     security interest upon the whole or any part of its undertaking or assets, present or future (including
     any uncalled capital), to secure any Indebtedness (as defined below) or any guarantee or indemnity
     given in respect of any Indebtedness, without, in the case of the creation of an encumbrance or
     security interest, at the same time and, in any other case, promptly granting to the Noteholders either,
     at the option of the relevant Issuer, an equal and rateable interest in the same or providing to the
     Noteholders such other security as either (i) (except in the case of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee shall,
     in its absolute discretion, deem to be not materially less beneficial to the Noteholders or (ii) (in the
     case of any Notes, including Interbolsa Notes) as shall be approved by an Extraordinary Resolution
     (as described in Condition 15 and in the Trust Deed or, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, in the
     Principal Agency Agreement, as amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement) of the
     Noteholders.

     “Indebtedness” means any borrowings having an original maturity of more than one year in the form
     of or represented by bonds, notes, debentures or other securities (not comprising, for the avoidance
     of doubt preference shares or other equity securities) but excluding any Covered Bonds (as defined
     below):

     (i)     where more than 50 per cent. in aggregate principal amount of such bonds, notes, debentures
             or other securities are initially offered outside the Portuguese Republic; and

     (ii)    which with the consent of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), are, or
             are intended to be, listed or traded on any non-Portuguese domestic stock exchange, over-
             the- counter or other organised market for securities (whether or not initially distributed by
             way of private placing).

     “Covered Bonds” means any mortgage-backed bonds and/or covered bonds or notes (Obrigações
     Hipotecárias) issued by the Bank, the obligations of which benefit from a special creditor privilege
     (“privilégio creditório especial”) as a result of them being collateralised by a defined pool of assets
     comprised of mortgage loans or other loans permitted by applicable Portuguese legislation to be
     included in the pool of assets and where the requirements for that collateralisation are regulated by
     applicable Portuguese legislation.

4.   Status of the Guarantee

     The Bank, acting through its London branch, has in the Trust Deed unconditionally and irrevocably
     guaranteed the due and punctual payment by BES Finance of the principal of, and interest on, the
     Notes issued by BES Finance and all other amounts payable under or pursuant to the Trust Deed.

     The obligations of the Bank, acting through its London branch, under the Guarantee constitute:

     (i)     in the case of Senior Notes issued by BES Finance, direct, unconditional, unsecured (subject
             to the provisions of Condition 3) and unsubordinated obligations of the Bank and rank and
             will rank pari passu with all present and future unsecured (subject as aforesaid) and
             unsubordinated obligations (including those arising under deposits received in its banking
             business) of the Bank, except for obligations given priority by law; and

                                                    94
      (ii)    in the case of Subordinated Notes issued by BES Finance, direct, unsecured obligations of
              the Bank but, in the event of the insolvency or liquidation of the Bank, subordinated in right
              of payment to the claims of depositors and all other unsecured creditors of the Bank (other
              than creditors in respect of indebtedness of the Bank which is subordinated to at least the
              same extent as the obligations of the Bank under its guarantee in respect of such
              Subordinated Notes).

      In the event of liquidation, bankruptcy or analogous proceedings of the Bank, no holder of
      Subordinated Notes (having a debt or a liability towards the Bank) may exercise any set-off or other
      similar rights against any amounts held by the Bank.

5.    Interest

(a)   Interest on Fixed Rate Notes

      Each Fixed Rate Note bears interest from (and including) the Interest Commencement Date specified
      in the applicable Final Terms at the rate(s) per annum equal to the Rate(s) of Interest so specified in
      the applicable Final Terms. Interest will be payable in arrear on the Interest Payment Date(s) in each
      year up to (and including) the Maturity Date. For so long as any of the Fixed Rate Notes is
      represented by a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, interest
      will be paid to Clearstream, Luxembourg and Euroclear for distribution by them to entitled
      accountholders in accordance with their usual rules and operating procedures. Interest on Fixed Rate
      Notes which are Interbolsa Notes will be paid to the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for distribution
      by them to the accounts of entitled Noteholders in accordance with Interbolsa’s usual rules and
      operating procedures.

      If the Notes are in definitive form, except as provided in the applicable Final Terms, the amount of
      interest payable on each Interest Payment Date in respect of the Fixed Interest Period ending on (but
      excluding) such date will amount to the Fixed Coupon Amount. Payments of interest on any Interest
      Payment Date will, if so specified in the applicable Final Terms, amount to the Broken Amount so
      specified.

      As used in these Terms and Conditions, “Fixed Interest Period” means the period from (and
      including) an Interest Payment Date (or the Interest Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the
      next (or first) Interest Payment Date.

      Except in the case of Notes in definitive form where an applicable Fixed Coupon Amount or Broken
      Amount is specified in the applicable Final Terms, interest shall be calculated in respect of any
      period by applying the Rate of Interest to:

      (A)     in the case of Fixed Rate Notes which are either Interbolsa Notes or are represented by a
              global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, the full nominal
              amount outstanding of the Fixed Rate Notes; or

      (B)     in the case of Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form, the Calculation Amount;

      and, in each case, multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction, and rounding the
      resultant figure to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any such sub-unit
      being rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market convention. Where the
      Specified Denomination of a Fixed Rate Note in definitive form is a multiple of the Calculation
      Amount, the amount of interest payable in respect of such Fixed Rate Note shall be the product of
      the amount (determined in the manner provided above) for the Calculation Amount and the amount
      by which the Calculation Amount is multiplied to reach the Specified Denomination, without any
      further rounding.

                                                    95
      “Day Count Fraction” means, in respect of the calculation of an amount of interest in accordance
      with this Condition 5(a):

      (i)    if “Actual/Actual (ICMA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms:

             (A)     in the case of Notes where the number of days in the relevant period from (and
                     including) the most recent Interest Payment Date (or, if none, the Interest
                     Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the relevant payment date (the “Accrual
                     Period”) is equal to or shorter than the Determination Period during which the
                     Accrual Period ends, the number of days in such Accrual Period divided by the
                     product of (1) the number of days in such Determination Period and (2) the number
                     of Determination Dates (as specified in the applicable Final Terms) that would occur
                     in one calendar year; or

             (B)     in the case of Notes where the Accrual Period is longer than the Determination
                     Period during which the Accrual Period ends, the sum of:

                     (1)        the number of days in such Accrual Period falling in the Determination
                                Period in which the Accrual Period begins divided by the product of (x) the
                                number of days in such Determination Period and (y) the number of
                                Determination Dates (as specified in the applicable Final Terms) that would
                                occur in one calendar year; and

                     (2)        the number of days in such Accrual Period falling in the next Determination
                                Period divided by the product of (x) the number of days in such
                                Determination Period and (y) the number of Determination Dates that would
                                occur in one calendar year; and

      (ii)   if “30/360” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number of days in the period from
             (and including) the most recent Interest Payment Date (or, if none, the Interest
             Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the relevant payment date (such number of days
             being calculated on the basis of a year of 360 days with 12 30-day months) divided by 360.

             In these Terms and Conditions:

             “Determination Period” means the period from (and including) a Determination Date to (but
             excluding) the next Determination Date (including, where either the Interest Commencement
             Date or the final Interest Payment Date is not a Determination Date, the period commencing
             on the first Determination Date prior to, and ending on the first Determination Date falling
             after, such date); and

             “sub-unit” means, with respect to any currency other than euro, the lowest amount of such
             currency that is available as legal tender in the country of such currency and, with respect to
             euro, means one cent.

(b)   Interest on Reset Notes

      (i)    Rates of Interest and Interest Payment Dates

             Each Reset Note bears interest:

             (A)     from (and including) the Interest Commencement Date specified in the applicable
                     Final Terms until (but excluding) the First Reset Date at the rate per annum equal to
                     the Initial Rate of Interest;


                                                    96
(B)     from (and including) the First Reset Date until (but excluding) the Second Reset
        Date or, if no such Second Reset Date is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the
        Maturity Date at the rate per annum equal to the First Reset Rate of Interest; and

(C)     for each Subsequent Reset Period thereafter (if any), at the rate per annum equal to
        the relevant Subsequent Reset Rate of Interest,

payable, in each case, in arrear on the date(s) so specified in the applicable Final Terms on
which interest is payable in each year (each an “Interest Payment Date”) (subject to
adjustment as described in the second paragraph of Condition 5(a)) and on the Maturity Date
if that does not fall on an Interest Payment Date. The Rate of Interest and the amount of
interest (the “Interest Amount”) payable shall be determined by the Calculation Agent, (A)
in the case of the Rate of Interest, at or as soon as practicable after each time at which the
Rate of Interest is to be determined, and (B) in the case of the Interest Amount in accordance
with the provisions for calculating amounts of interest in Condition 5(a) and, for such
purposes, references in the second and third paragraphs of Condition 5(a) to “Fixed Rate
Notes” shall be deemed to be to “Reset Notes” and Condition 5(a) shall be construed
accordingly.

In these Terms and Conditions:

“First Margin” means the margin specified as such in the applicable Final Terms;

“First Reset Date” means the date specified in the applicable Final Terms;

“First Reset Period” means the period from (and including) the First Reset Date until (but
excluding) the Second Reset Date or, if no such Second Reset Date is specified in the
applicable Final Terms, the Maturity Date;

“First Reset Rate of Interest” means, in respect of the First Reset Period and subject to
Condition 5(b)(ii), the rate of interest determined by the Calculation Agent on the relevant
Reset Determination Date as the sum of the relevant Mid-Swap Rate and the First Margin;

“Initial Rate of Interest” has the meaning specified in the applicable Final Terms;

“Mid-Market Swap Rate” means for any Reset Period the mean of the bid and offered rates
for the fixed leg payable with a frequency equivalent to the frequency with which scheduled
interest payments are payable on the Notes during the relevant Reset Period (calculated on
the day count basis customary for fixed rate payments in the Specified Currency as
determined by the Calculation Agent) of a fixed-for-floating interest rate swap transaction in
the Specified Currency which transaction (i) has a term equal to the relevant Reset Period
and commencing on the relevant Reset Date, (ii) is in an amount that is representative for a
single transaction in the relevant market at the relevant time with an acknowledged dealer of
good credit in the swap market and (iii) has a floating leg based on the Mid-Swap Floating
Leg Benchmark Rate for the Mid-Swap Maturity (as specified in the applicable Final Terms)
(calculated on the day count basis customary for floating rate payments in the Specified
Currency as determined by the Calculation Agent);

“Mid-Market Swap Rate Quotation” means a quotation (expressed as a percentage rate
per annum) for the relevant Mid-Market Swap Rate;

“Mid-Swap Floating Leg Benchmark Rate” means EURIBOR if the Specified Currency is
euro or LIBOR for the Specified Currency if the Specified Currency is not euro;



                                     97
“Mid-Swap Rate” means, in relation to a Reset Determination Date and subject to
Condition 3(b)(ii), either:

(i)     if Single Mid-Swap Rate is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the rate for
        swaps in the Specified Currency:

        (A)     with a term equal to the relevant Reset Period; and

        (B)     commencing on the relevant Reset Date,

        which appears on the Relevant Screen Page; or

(ii)    if Mean Mid-Swap Rate is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the arithmetic
        mean (expressed as a percentage rate per annum and rounded, if necessary, to the
        nearest 0.001 per cent. (0.0005 per cent. being rounded upwards) ) of the bid and
        offered swap rate quotations for swaps in the Specified Currency:

        (A)     with a term equal to the relevant Reset Period; and

        (B)     commencing on the relevant Reset Date,

        which appear on the Relevant Screen Page,

        in either case, as at approximately 11.00 a.m. in the principal financial centre of the
        Specified Currency on such Reset Determination Date, all as determined by the
        Calculation Agent;

“Rate of Interest” means the Initial Rate of Interest, the First Reset Rate of Interest or the
Subsequent Reset Rate of Interest, as applicable;

“Reset Date” means the First Reset Date, the Second Reset Date and each Subsequent Reset
Date (as applicable), in each case as adjusted (if so specified in the applicable Final Terms)
in accordance with Condition 5(a) as if the relevant Reset Date was an Interest Payment
Date;

“Reset Determination Date” means, in respect of the First Reset Period, the second
Business Day prior to the First Reset Date, in respect of the first Subsequent Reset Period,
the second Business Day prior to the Second Reset Date and, in respect of each Subsequent
Reset Period thereafter, the second Business Day prior to the first day of each such
Subsequent Reset Period;

“Reset Period” means the First Reset Period or a Subsequent Reset Period, as the case may
be;

“Second Reset Date” means the date specified in the applicable Final Terms;

“Subsequent Margin” means the margin specified as such in the applicable Final Terms;

“Subsequent Reset Date” means the date or dates specified in the applicable Final Terms;

“Subsequent Reset Period” means the period from (and including) the Second Reset Date
to (but excluding) the next Subsequent Reset Date, and each successive period from (and
including) a Subsequent Reset Date to (but excluding) the next succeeding Subsequent Reset
Date; and


                                     98
        “Subsequent Reset Rate of Interest” means, in respect of any Subsequent Reset Period and
        subject to Condition 5(b)(ii), the rate of interest determined by the Calculation Agent on the
        relevant Reset Determination Date as the sum of the relevant Mid-Swap Rate and the
        relevant Subsequent Margin.

(ii)    Fallbacks

        If on any Reset Determination Date the Relevant Screen Page is not available or the Mid-
        Swap Rate does not appear on the Relevant Screen Page, the Calculation Agent shall request
        each of the Reference Banks (as defined below) to provide the Calculation Agent with its
        Mid-Market Swap Rate Quotation as at approximately 11.00 a.m. in the principal financial
        centre of the Specified Currency on the Reset Determination Date in question.

        If two or more of the Reference Banks provide the Calculation Agent with Mid-Market
        Swap Rate Quotations, the First Reset Rate of Interest or the Subsequent Reset Rate of
        Interest (as applicable) for the relevant Reset Period shall be the sum of the arithmetic mean
        (rounded, if necessary, to the nearest 0.001 per cent. (0.0005 per cent. being rounded
        upwards)) of the relevant Mid-Market Swap Rate Quotations and the First Margin or
        Subsequent Margin (as applicable), all as determined by the Calculation Agent.

        If on any Reset Determination Date only one or none of the Reference Banks provides the
        Calculation Agent with a Mid-Market Swap Rate Quotation as provided in the foregoing
        provisions of this paragraph, the First Reset Rate of Interest or the Subsequent Reset Rate of
        Interest (as applicable) shall be determined to be the Rate of Interest as at the last preceding
        Reset Date or, in the case of the first Reset Determination Date, the First Reset Rate of
        Interest shall be the Initial Rate of Interest.

        For the purposes of this Condition 5(b)(ii) “Reference Banks” means the principal office in
        the principal financial centre of the Specified Currency of four major banks in the swap,
        money, securities or other market most closely connected with the relevant Mid-Swap Rate
        as selected by the Issuer on the advice of an investment bank of international repute.

(iii)   Notification of First Reset Rate of Interest, Subsequent Reset Rate of Interest and Interest
        Amount

        The Calculation Agent will cause the First Reset Rate of Interest, any Subsequent Reset Rate
        of Interest and, in respect of a Reset Period, the Interest Amount payable on each Interest
        Payment Date falling in such Reset Period to be notified to the Issuer, the other Paying
        Agents and any stock exchange or other relevant authority on which the relevant Reset Notes
        are for the time being listed or by which they have been admitted to listing and notice
        thereof to be published in accordance with Condition 14 as soon as possible after their
        determination but in no event later than the fourth London Business Day (where a “London
        Business Day” means a day (other than a Saturday or a Sunday) on which banks and foreign
        exchange markets are open for business in London) thereafter.

(iv)    Determination or Calculation by Trustee or by a designated bank

        If for any reason the Calculation Agent defaults in its obligation to determine the First Reset
        Rate of Interest, a Subsequent Reset Rate of Interest or to calculate any Interest Amount in
        accordance with this Condition 5(b), then (A) (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes), the
        Trustee or (B) (in respect of Interbolsa Notes), any bank designated by the Common
        Representative for such purpose or, if no such bank is designated, a meeting of the
        Noteholders by Extraordinary Resolution, shall determine the First Reset Rate of Interest or


                                              99
             the Subsequent Reset Rate of Interest (as applicable) at such rate as, in its absolute discretion
             (having such regard as it shall think fit to the foregoing provisions of this Condition but
             subject always to any terms specified in the applicable Final Terms), it shall deem fair and
             reasonable in all the circumstances or, as the case may be, the Trustee, designated bank or
             meeting of holders of Interbolsa Notes, as the case may be, shall calculate the Interest
             Amount(s) in such manner as it shall deem fair and reasonable in all the circumstances and
             each such determination or calculation shall be deemed to have been made by the
             Calculation Agent.

      (v)    Certificates to be final

             All certificates, communications, opinions, determinations, calculations, quotations and
             decisions given, expressed, made or obtained for the purposes of the provisions of this
             Condition 5(b), whether by the Calculation Agent or (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes)
             the Trustee, or (in the case of Interbolsa Notes), by or on behalf of the Common
             Representative, shall (in the absence of negligence, wilful default, bad faith or manifest
             error) be binding on the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Agent, the
             Calculation Agent, the Trustee, the Common Representative, the other Paying Agents and all
             Noteholders and Couponholders and (in the absence as aforesaid) no liability to the Issuer,
             the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Noteholders or the Couponholders shall
             attach to either the Calculation Agent or the Trustee or the Common Representative in
             connection with the exercise or non-exercise by it of its powers, duties and discretions
             pursuant to such provisions.

(c)   Interest on Floating Rate Notes

      (i)    Interest Payment Dates

             Each Floating Rate Note bears interest from (and including) the Interest Commencement
             Date and such interest will be payable in arrear on either:

             (A)     the Specified Interest Payment Date(s) in each year specified in the applicable Final
                     Terms; or

             (B)     if no Specified Interest Payment Date(s) is/are specified in the applicable Final
                     Terms, each date (each such date, together with each Specified Interest Payment
                     Date, an “Interest Payment Date”) which falls on the number of months or other
                     period specified as the Specified Period in the applicable Final Terms after the
                     preceding Interest Payment Date or, in the case of the first Interest Payment Date,
                     after the Interest Commencement Date.

             Such interest will be payable in respect of each Interest Period (which expression shall, in
             these Terms and Conditions, mean the period from (and including) an Interest Payment Date
             (or the Interest Commencement Date) to (but excluding) the next (or first) Interest Payment
             Date). For so long as any of the Floating Rate Notes is represented by a global Note held on
             behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or Euroclear, interest will be paid to Clearstream,
             Luxembourg and Euroclear for distribution by them to entitled accountholders in accordance
             with their usual rules and operating procedures. Interest on Floating Rate Notes which are
             Interbolsa Notes will be paid to the Affiliate Members of Interbolsa for distribution by them
             to the accounts of entitled Noteholders in accordance with Interbolsa’s usual rules and
             operating procedures.




                                                   100
       If a Business Day Convention is specified in the applicable Final Terms and (x) there is no
       numerically corresponding day in the calendar month on which an Interest Payment Date (or
       other date) should occur or (y) if any Interest Payment Date (or other date) would otherwise
       fall on a day which is not a Business Day, then, if the Business Day Convention specified is:

       (1)     in any case where Specified Periods are specified in accordance with Condition
               5(c)(i)(B), the Floating Rate Convention, such Interest Payment Date (i) in the case
               of (x) above, shall be the last day that is a Business Day in the relevant month and
               the provisions of (B) below shall apply mutatis mutandis or (ii) in the case of (y)
               above, shall be postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would
               thereby fall into the next calendar month, in which event (A) such Interest Payment
               Date shall be brought forward to the immediately preceding Business Day and (B)
               each subsequent Interest Payment Date shall be the last Business Day in the month
               which falls the Specified Period after the preceding applicable Interest Payment
               Date occurred; or

       (2)     the Following Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be
               postponed to the next day which is a Business Day; or

       (3)     the Modified Following Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall
               be postponed to the next day which is a Business Day unless it would thereby fall
               into the next calendar month, in which event such Interest Payment Date shall be
               brought forward to the immediately preceding Business Day; or

       (4)     the Preceding Business Day Convention, such Interest Payment Date shall be
               brought forward to the immediately preceding Business Day.

       In these Terms and Conditions, “Business Day” means a day which is both:

       (A)     a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments
               and are open for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign
               currency deposits) in Lisbon in the case of Interbolsa Notes and any Additional
               Business Centre specified in the applicable Final Terms; and

       (B)     either (1) in relation to any sum payable in a Specified Currency other than euro, a
               day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and
               are open for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign
               currency deposits) in the principal financial centre of the country of the relevant
               Specified Currency (which, if the Specified Currency is Australian dollars or New
               Zealand dollars, shall be Sydney and Auckland, respectively) or (2) in relation to
               any sum payable in euro, a day on which the Trans-European Automated Real-Time
               Gross Settlement Express Transfer (TARGET2) System (the “TARGET2 System”)
               is open.

       Interest will be paid subject to and in accordance with the provisions of Condition 6.

(ii)   Rate of Interest

       The Rate of Interest payable from time to time in respect of Floating Rate Notes will be
       determined in the manner specified in the applicable Final Terms.

       (A)     ISDA Determination for Floating Rate Notes




                                            101
      Where ISDA Determination is specified in the applicable Final Terms as the manner
      in which the Rate of Interest is to be determined, the Rate of Interest for each
      Interest Period will be the relevant ISDA Rate plus or minus (as indicated in the
      applicable Final Terms) the Margin (if any). For the purposes of this sub-
      paragraph (A), “ISDA Rate” for an Interest Period means a rate equal to the Floating
      Rate that would be determined by the Agent or other person specified in the
      applicable Final Terms under an interest rate swap transaction if the Agent or that
      other person were acting as Calculation Agent for that swap transaction under the
      terms of an agreement incorporating the 2006 ISDA Definitions (as published by the
      International Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. and amended and updated as
      at the Issue Date of the first Tranche of Notes and as published by the International
      Swaps and Derivatives Association, Inc. (the “ISDA Definitions”)) and under
      which:

      (1)     the Floating Rate Option is as specified in the applicable Final Terms;

      (2)     the Designated Maturity is a period specified in the applicable Final Terms;
              and

      (3)     the relevant Reset Date is the day specified in the applicable Final Terms.

      For the purposes of this sub-paragraph (A), “Euro-zone”, “Floating Rate”,
      “Calculation Agent”, “Floating Rate Option”, “Designated Maturity” and “Reset
      Date” have the meanings given to those terms in the ISDA Definitions.

      When this sub-paragraph (A) applies, in respect of each relevant Interest Period the
      Agent will be deemed to have discharged its obligations under Condition 5(c)(ii) in
      respect of the determination of the Interest Rate if it has determined the Rate of
      Interest in respect of such Interest Period in the manner provided in this sub-
      paragraph (A).

(B)   Screen Rate Determination for Floating Rate Notes

      Where Screen Rate Determination is specified in the applicable Final Terms as the
      manner in which the Rate of Interest is to be determined, the Rate of Interest for
      each Interest Period will, subject as provided below, be either:

      (1)     the offered quotation; or

      (2)     the arithmetic mean (rounded if necessary to the fifth decimal place, with
              0.000005 being rounded upwards) of the offered quotations,

      (expressed as a percentage rate per annum) for the Reference Rate (being LIBOR or
      EURIBOR as specified in the applicable Final Terms) which appears or appear, as
      the case may be, on the Relevant Screen Page as at the Specified Time (as defined
      below) on the Interest Determination Date in question plus or minus (as indicated in
      the applicable Final Terms) the Margin (if any), all as determined by the Agent. If
      five or more of such offered quotations are available on the Relevant Screen Page,
      the highest (or, if there is more than one such highest quotation, one only of such
      quotations) and the lowest (or, if there is more than one such lowest quotation, one
      only of such quotations) shall be disregarded by the Agent for the purpose of
      determining the arithmetic mean (rounded as provided above) of such offered
      quotations.



                                   102
If the Relevant Screen Page is not available or if, in the case of 0 above, no such
quotation appears or, in the case of 0 above, fewer than three such offered quotations
appear, in each case as at the Specified Time, the Agent or other person specified in
the applicable Final Terms as the party responsible for calculating the Rate(s) of
Interest and Interest Amount(s) shall request, if the Reference Rate is LIBOR, the
principal London office of each of the Reference Banks (as defined below) or, if the
Reference Rate is EURIBOR, the principal Eurozone office of each of the Reference
Banks, to provide the Agent with its offered quotation (expressed as a percentage
rate per annum) for deposits in the Specified Currency for the relevant Interest
Period, if the Reference Rate is LIBOR, to leading banks in the London inter bank
market as at approximately 11.00 a.m. (London time) or, if the Reference Rate is
EURIBOR, to leading banks in the Euro zone inter bank market as at 11.00 a.m.
(Brussels time), on the Interest Determination Date in question. If two or more of the
Reference Banks provide the Agent with offered quotations, the Rate of Interest for
the Interest Period shall be the arithmetic mean (rounded if necessary to the fifth
decimal place, with 0.000005 being rounded upwards) of the offered quotations plus
or minus (as appropriate) the Margin (if any), all as determined by the Agent.

If on any Interest Determination Date one only or none of the Reference Banks
provides the Agent with an offered quotation as provided in the preceding
paragraph, the Rate of Interest for the relevant Interest Period shall be the rate per
annum which the Agent determines as being the arithmetic mean (rounded if
necessary to the fifth decimal place, with 0.000005 being rounded upwards) of the
rates, as communicated to (and at the request of) the Agent by the Reference Banks
or any two or more of them, at which such banks were offered, at approximately the
Specified Time on the relevant Interest Determination Date, deposits in the
Specified Currency for a period equal to that which would have been used for the
Reference Rate by leading banks in the London inter-bank market (if the Reference
Rate is LIBOR) or the Euro-zone inter-bank market (if the Reference Rate is
EURIBOR) plus or minus (as appropriate) the Margin (if any) or, if fewer than two
of the Reference Banks provide the Agent with offered rates, the offered rate for
deposits in the Specified Currency for a period equal to that which would have been
used for the Reference Rate, or the arithmetic mean (rounded as provided above) of
the offered rates for deposits in the Specified Currency for a period equal to that
which would have been used for the Reference Rate, at which, at approximately the
Specified Time on the relevant Interest Determination Date, any one or more banks
(which bank or banks is or are in the opinion of the Issuer suitable for the purpose)
informs the Agent it is quoting to leading banks in the London inter-bank market (if
the Reference Rate is LIBOR) or the Euro-zone inter-bank market (if the Reference
Rate is EURIBOR) plus or minus (as appropriate) the Margin (if any), provided that,
if the Rate of Interest cannot be determined in accordance with the foregoing
provisions of this paragraph, the Rate of Interest shall be determined as at the last
preceding Interest Determination Date (though substituting, where a different
Margin is to be applied to the relevant Interest Period from that which applied to the
last preceding Interest Period, the Margin relating to the relevant Interest Period in
place of the Margin relating to that last preceding Interest Period).

For the purposes of this Condition 5(b)(ii)(B):

“Reference Banks” means, in the case of a determination of LIBOR, the principal
London office of four major banks in the London interbank market; and in the case
of a determination of EURIBOR, the principal Euro-zone office of four major banks
in the Euro-zone interbank market, in each case selected by the Agent.


                             103
                “Reference Rate” means, as specified in the Final Terms, (i) the London interbank
                offered rate (“LIBOR”) or (ii) the Euro-zone interbank offered rate (“EURIBOR”),
                as specified for each in the Final Terms.

               “Relevant Financial Centre” means the financial centre specified as such in the Final
               Terms or if none is so specified: (i) in the case of a determination of LIBOR,
               London or (ii) in the case of a determination of EURIBOR, Brussels.
               “Specified Time” means the time specified as such in the Final Terms or if none is
               so specified: (i) in the case of a determination of LIBOR, 11.00 a.m., or (ii) in the
               case of a determination of EURIBOR, 11.00 a.m., in each case in the Relevant
               Financial Centre.

(iii)   Minimum Rate of Interest and/or Maximum Rate of Interest

        If the applicable Final Terms specifies a Minimum Rate of Interest for any Interest Period,
        then, in the event that the Rate of Interest in respect of such Interest Period determined in
        accordance with the provisions of paragraph (ii) above is less than such Minimum Rate of
        Interest, the Rate of Interest for such Interest Period shall be such Minimum Rate of Interest.
        Unless otherwise stated in the applicable Final Terms, the Minimum Rate of Interest shall be
        deemed to be zero.

        If the applicable Final Terms specifies a Maximum Rate of Interest for any Interest Period,
        then, in the event that the Rate of Interest in respect of such Interest Period determined in
        accordance with the provisions of paragraph (ii) above is greater than such Maximum Rate
        of Interest, the Rate of Interest for such Interest Period shall be such Maximum Rate of
        Interest.

(iv)    Determination of Rate of Interest and Calculation of Interest Amounts

        The Agent will at or as soon as practicable after each time at which the Rate of Interest is to
        be determined, determine the Rate of Interest for the relevant Interest Period.

        The Agent will calculate the amount of interest (the “Interest Amount”) payable on the
        Floating Rate Notes for the relevant Interest Period by applying the Rate of Interest to:

        (A)     in the case of Floating Rate Notes which are either Interbolsa Notes or are
                represented by a global Note held on behalf of Clearstream, Luxembourg and/or
                Euroclear, the full nominal amount outstanding of the relevant Notes; or

        (B)     in the case of Floating Rate Notes in definitive form, the Calculation Amount;

        and, in each case, multiplying such sum by the applicable Day Count Fraction and rounding
        the resultant figure to the nearest sub-unit of the relevant Specified Currency, half of any
        such sub-unit being rounded upwards or otherwise in accordance with applicable market
        convention. Where the Specified Denomination of a Floating Rate Note in definitive form is
        a multiple of the Calculation Amount, the Interest Amount payable in respect of such Note
        shall be the product of the amount (determined in the manner provided above) for the
        Calculation Amount and the amount by which the Calculation Amount is multiplied to reach
        the Specified Denomination, without any further rounding.

        “Day Count Fraction” means, in respect of the calculation of an amount of interest for any
        Interest Period:




                                             104
(i)     if “Actual/Actual” or “Actual/Actual (ISDA)” is specified in the applicable Final
        Terms, the actual number of days in the Interest Period divided by 365 (or, if any
        portion of that Interest Period falls in a leap year, the sum of (A) the actual number
        of days in that portion of the Interest Period falling in a leap year divided by 366 and
        (B) the actual number of days in that portion of the Interest Period falling in a non-
        leap year divided by 365);

(ii)    if “Actual/365 (Fixed)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number
        of days in the Interest Period divided by 365;

(iii)   if “Actual/365 (Sterling)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual
        number of days in the Interest Period divided by 365 or, in the case of an Interest
        Payment Date falling in a leap year, 366;

(iv)    if “Actual/360” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the actual number of days
        in the Interest Period divided by 360;

(v)     if “30/360”, “360/360” or “Bond Basis” is specified in the applicable Final Terms,
        the number of days in the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula
        basis as follows:

                               [360 x (Y2 - Y1 )]  [30 x (M2 - M1 )]  (D2 - D1 )
        Day Count Fraction 
                                                      360

        where:

        “Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period
        falls;

        “Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the
        last day of the Interest Period falls;

        “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the
        Interest Period falls;

        “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately
        following the last day of the Interest Period falls;

        “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless
        such number is 31, in which case D1 will be 30; and

        “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day
        included in the Interest Period, unless such number would be 31 and D1 is greater
        than 29, in which case D2 will be 30;

(vi)    if “30E/360” or “Eurobond Basis” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the
        number of days in the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis
        as follows:

                               [360 x (Y2 - Y1 )]  [30 x (M2 - M1 )]  (D2 - D1 )
        Day Count Fraction 
                                                      360

        where:


                                     105
              “Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period
              falls;

              “Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the
              last day of the Interest Period falls;

              “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the
              Interest Period falls;

              “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately
              following the last day of the Interest Period falls;

              “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless
              such number would be 31, in which case D1 will be 30; and

              “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day
              included in the Interest Period, unless such number would be 31, in which case D2
              will be 30;

      (vii)   if “30E/360 (ISDA)” is specified in the applicable Final Terms, the number of days
              in the Interest Period divided by 360, calculated on a formula basis as follows:

                                     [360 x (Y2 - Y1 )]  [30 x (M2 - M1 )]  (D2 - D1 )
              Day Count Fraction 
                                                            360

              where:

              “Y1” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the Interest Period
              falls;

              “Y2” is the year, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately following the
              last day of the Interest Period falls;

              “M1” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the first day of the
              Interest Period falls;

              “M2” is the calendar month, expressed as a number, in which the day immediately
              following the last day of the Interest Period falls;

              “D1” is the first calendar day, expressed as a number, of the Interest Period, unless
              (i) that day is the last day of February or (ii) such number would be 31, in which
              case D1 will be 30; and

              “D2” is the calendar day, expressed as a number, immediately following the last day
              included in the Interest Period, unless (i) that day is the last day of February but not
              the Maturity Date or (ii) such number would be 31, in which case D2 will be 30.

(v)   Notification of Rate of Interest and Interest Amounts

      The Agent will cause the Rate of Interest and each Interest Amount for each Interest Period
      and the relevant Interest Payment Date to be notified to the Issuer, the other Paying Agents
      and any stock exchange or other relevant authority on which the relevant Floating Rate
      Notes are for the time being listed (by no later than the first day of each Interest Period) or
      by which they have been admitted to listing and notice thereof to be published in accordance

                                           106
              with Condition 14 as soon as possible after their determination but in no event later than the
              fourth London Business Day thereafter. Each Interest Amount and Interest Payment Date so
              notified may subsequently be amended (or appropriate alternative arrangements made by
              way of adjustment) without prior notice in the event of an extension or shortening of the
              Interest Period. Any such amendment will be promptly notified to each stock exchange or
              other relevant authority on which the relevant Floating Rate Notes are for the time being
              listed or by which they have been admitted to listing and to the Noteholders in accordance
              with Condition 14.

      (vi)    Determination or calculation by Trustee or by a designated bank

              If for any reason the Agent at any time after the Issue Date defaults in its obligation to
              determine the Rate of Interest or calculate any Interest Amount in accordance with sub-
              paragraph (ii) above, then (A) (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes), the Trustee or (B) (in
              respect of Interbolsa Notes), any bank designated by the Common Representative for such
              purpose or, if no such bank is designated, a meeting of the Noteholders by Extraordinary
              Resolution, shall determine the Rate of Interest at such rate as, in its absolute discretion
              (having such regard as it shall think fit to the foregoing provisions of this Condition but
              subject always to any Minimum Rate of Interest and/or Maximum Rate of Interest specified
              in the applicable Final Terms) it shall deem fair and reasonable in all the circumstances or,
              as the case may be, the Trustee, designated bank or meeting of holders of Interbolsa Notes,
              as the case may be, shall calculate the Interest Amount(s) in such manner as it shall deem
              fair and reasonable in all the circumstances and each such determination or calculation shall
              be deemed to have been made by the Agent.

      (vii)   Certificates to be Final

              All certificates, communications, opinions, determinations, calculations, quotations and
              decisions given, expressed, made or obtained for the purposes of the provisions of this
              Condition 5(b), whether by the Agent or (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee,
              or (in the case of Interbolsa Notes), by or on behalf of the Common Representative, shall (in
              the absence of negligence, wilful default, bad faith or manifest error) be binding on the
              Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), the Agent, the Trustee, the Common
              Representative, the other Paying Agents and all Noteholders and Couponholders and (in the
              absence as aforesaid) no liability to the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance),
              the Noteholders or the Couponholders shall attach to the Agent or the Trustee or the
              Common Representative in connection with the exercise or non-exercise by it of its powers,
              duties and discretions pursuant to such provisions.

(d)   Accrual of Interest

      Each Note (or in the case of the redemption of part only of a Note, that part only of such Note) will
      cease to bear interest (if any) from the date scheduled for its redemption unless payment of principal
      is improperly withheld or refused. In such event, interest will continue to accrue, in the case of Notes
      other than Interbolsa Notes, as provided in the Trust Deed or, in the case of Interbolsa Notes, until
      whichever is the earlier of:

      (i)     the date on which all amounts due in respect of such Interbolsa Note have been paid; and

      (ii)    five days after the date on which the full amount of the moneys payable in respect of such
              Interbolsa Note has been received by the Agent and notice to that effect has been given to
              the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14.




                                                    107
6.    Payments

(a)   Method of Payment

      Subject as provided below:

      (i)     payments in a Specified Currency other than euro will be made by transfer to an account in
              the relevant Specified Currency maintained by the payee with a bank in the principal
              financial centre of the country of such Specified Currency (which, if the Specified Currency
              is Australian dollars or New Zealand dollars, shall be Sydney and Auckland, respectively);
              and

      (ii)    payments will be made in euro by credit or transfer to a euro account (or any other account
              to which euro may be credited or transferred) specified by the payee.

(b)   Payments subject to fiscal and other laws

      Payments in respect of the Notes will be subject in all cases to (i) any fiscal or other laws and
      regulations applicable thereto in the place of payment, but without prejudice to the provisions of
      Condition 8, and (ii) any withholding or deduction required pursuant to an agreement described in
      Section 1471(b) of the U.S. Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (the “Code”) or otherwise imposed
      pursuant to Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code, any regulations or agreements thereunder, any
      official interpretations thereof, or (without prejudice to the provisions of Condition 8) any law
      implementing an intergovernmental approach thereto.

(c)   Presentation of definitive Notes and Coupons

      Payments of principal in respect of definitive Notes will (subject as provided below) be made in the
      manner provided in paragraph (a) above only against surrender of definitive Notes, and payments of
      interest in respect of definitive Notes will (subject as provided below) be made as aforesaid only
      against surrender of Coupons, in each case at the specified office of any Paying Agent outside the
      United States (which expression, as used herein, means the United States of America (including the
      States and the District of Columbia) and its possessions).

      Fixed Rate Notes in definitive form should be presented for payment together with all unmatured
      Coupons appertaining thereto (which expression shall for this purpose include Coupons falling to be
      issued on exchange of matured Talons), failing which the amount of any missing unmatured Coupon
      (or, in the case of payment not being made in full, the same proportion of the amount of such
      missing unmatured Coupon as the sum so paid bears to the sum due) will be deducted from the sum
      due for payment. Each amount of principal so deducted will be paid in the manner mentioned above
      against surrender of the relative missing Coupon at any time before the expiry of 10 years after the
      Relevant Date (as defined in Condition 8) in respect of such principal (whether or not such Coupon
      would otherwise have become void under Condition 9) or, if later, five years from the date on which
      such Coupon would otherwise have become due, but in no event thereafter.

      Upon any Fixed Rate Note in definitive form becoming due and repayable prior to its Maturity Date,
      all unmatured Talons (if any) appertaining thereto will become void and no further Coupons will be
      issued in respect thereof.

      Upon the date on which any Floating Rate Note or Long Maturity Note in definitive form becomes
      due and repayable, unmatured Coupons and Talons (if any) relating thereto (whether or not attached)
      shall become void and no payment or, as the case may be, exchange for further Coupons shall be
      made in respect thereof. A “Long Maturity Note” is a Fixed Rate Note (other than a Fixed Rate Note
      which on issue had a Talon attached) whose nominal amount on issue is less than the aggregate

                                                  108
      interest payable thereon provided that such Note shall cease to be a Long Maturity Note on the
      Interest Payment Date on which the aggregate amount of interest remaining to be paid after that date
      is less than the nominal amount of such Note.

      If the due date for redemption of any definitive Note is not an Interest Payment Date, interest (if any)
      accrued in respect of such Note from (and including) the preceding Interest Payment Date or, as the
      case may be, the Interest Commencement Date shall be payable only against surrender of the
      relevant definitive Note.

(d)   Payments in respect of global Notes

      Payments of principal and interest (if any) in respect of Notes represented by any global Note will
      (subject as provided below) be made in the manner specified above in relation to definitive Notes or
      otherwise in the manner specified in the relevant global Note, where applicable against presentation
      or surrender, as the case may be, of such global Note, if the global Note is not issued in new global
      note form, at the specified office of any Paying Agent outside the United States. A record of each
      payment made, distinguishing between any payment of principal and any payment of interest, will be
      made on such global Note either by the Paying Agent to which it was presented or, in the records of
      Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg, as applicable.

      The holder of a global Note (or, as provided in the Trust Deed, the Trustee) shall be the only person
      entitled to receive payments in respect of Notes represented by such global Note and the Issuer or, as
      the case may be, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) will be discharged by payment to, or to
      the order of, the holder of such global Note (or, as provided in the Trust Deed, the Trustee) in respect
      of each amount so paid. Each of the persons shown in the records of Euroclear or Clearstream,
      Luxembourg as the beneficial holder of a particular nominal amount of Notes represented by such
      global Note must look solely to Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, for his
      share of each payment so made by the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank (where the Issuer is
      BES Finance) to, or to the order of, the holder of such global Note (or, as provided in the Trust
      Deed, the Trustee).

(e)   Payments in respect of Interbolsa Notes

      All payments on Interbolsa Notes (including without limitation the payment of accrued interest and
      principal) will be made by the Issuer to the Portuguese Paying Agent and (i) if made in euro will be
      (a) credited, according to the procedures and regulations of Interbolsa, by the Portuguese Paying
      Agent to the payment current-accounts held in the payment system of the Bank of Portugal by the
      Affiliate Members of Interbolsa whose control accounts with Interbolsa are credited with such Notes
      and thereafter (b) credited by such Interbolsa Affiliate Members from the aforementioned payment
      current-accounts to the accounts of the Noteholders or through Euroclear and Clearstream,
      Luxembourg to the accounts with Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners
      of those Notes, in accordance with the rules and procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream,
      Luxembourg, as the case may be; (ii) if made in currencies other than euro will be (a) transferred,
      on the payment date and according to the procedures and regulations applicable by Interbolsa, from
      the account held by the Portuguese Paying Agent in the Foreign Currency Settlement System
      (Sistema de Liquidação em Moeda Estrangeira), managed by Caixa Geral de Depósitos, S.A., to the
      relevant accounts of the relevant Affiliate Members of Interbolsa, and thereafter (b) transferred by
      such Affiliate Members of Interbolsa from such relevant accounts to the accounts of the Noteholders
      of those Notes or through Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to the accounts with Euroclear
      and Clearstream, Luxembourg of the beneficial owners of those Notes, in accordance with the rules
      and procedures of Interbolsa, Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be.




                                                    109
      The Issuer must provide Interbolsa with a prior notice of all payments in relation to the Interbolsa
      Notes and all necessary information for that purpose. In particular, such notice must contain:

      (a)     the identity of the Portuguese Paying Agent responsible for the relevant payment; and

      (b)     a statement of acceptance of such responsibility by the Portuguese Paying Agent.

      Interbolsa shall notify the Portuguese Paying Agent of the amounts to be settled, which Interbolsa
      calculates on the basis of the balances and on the tax rules governing the accounts of the Affiliate
      Members of Interbolsa.

      In the case of a partial payment, the amount held in the relevant current account of the Portuguese
      Paying Agent must be apportioned pro-rata between the accounts of the Affiliate Members of
      Interbolsa. After a payment has been processed, such process shall be confirmed to Interbolsa.

      The holders of Interbolsa Notes are reliant upon the procedures of Interbolsa to receive payment in
      respect of Interbolsa Notes.

(f)   Amounts payable in U.S. dollars (not applicable to Interbolsa Notes)

      Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this Condition, if any amount of principal and/or
      interest in respect of this Note is payable in U.S. dollars, such U.S. dollar payments of principal
      and/or interest in respect of this Note will be made at the specified office of a Paying Agent in the
      United States if:

      (i)     the Issuer has appointed Paying Agents with specified offices outside the United States with
              the reasonable expectation that such Paying Agents would be able to make payment in U.S.
              dollars at such specified offices outside the United States of the full amount of principal and
              interest on the Notes in the manner provided above when due;

      (ii)    payment of the full amount of such principal and interest at all such specified offices outside
              the United States is illegal or effectively precluded by exchange controls or other similar
              restrictions on the full payment or receipt of principal and interest in U.S. dollars; and

      (iii)   such payment is then permitted under United States law without involving, in the opinion of
              the Issuer, adverse tax consequences to the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
              Finance).

(g)   Payment Day

      If the date for payment of any amount in respect of any Note or Coupon is not a Payment Day, the
      holder thereof shall not be entitled to payment until the next following Payment Day in the relevant
      place and shall not be entitled to further interest or other payment in respect of such delay. For these
      purposes, “Payment Day” means any day which (subject to Condition 9) is:

      (i)     a day on which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are
              open for general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency
              deposits) in:

              (A)     in the case of Notes in definitive form only, the relevant place of presentation (if
                      presentation is required);

              (B)     in respect of Interbolsa Notes only, Lisbon;



                                                    110
              (C)     any Additional Financial Centre specified in the applicable Final Terms; and

      (ii)    either (1) in relation to any sum payable in a Specified Currency other than euro, a day on
              which commercial banks and foreign exchange markets settle payments and are open for
              general business (including dealing in foreign exchange and foreign currency deposits) in the
              principal financial centre of the country of the relevant Specified Currency (which, if the
              Specified Currency is Australian dollars or New Zealand dollars, shall be Sydney and
              Auckland, respectively) or (2) in relation to any sum payable in euro, a day on which the
              TARGET2 System is open.

(h)   Interpretation of Principal and Interest

      Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to principal in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to
      include, as applicable:

      (i)     any additional amounts which may be payable with respect to principal under Condition 8
              or, except in the case of Interbolsa Notes, pursuant to any undertakings given in addition
              thereto or in substitution therefore pursuant to the Trust Deed;

      (ii)    the Final Redemption Amount of the Notes;

      (iii)   the Early Redemption Amount of the Notes;

      (iv)    the Optional Redemption Amount(s) (if any) of the Notes;

      (v)     in relation to Zero Coupon Notes, the Amortised Face Amount; and

      (vi)    any premium and any other amounts (other than interest) which may be payable by the
              Issuer under or in respect of the Notes.

      Any reference in these Terms and Conditions to interest in respect of the Notes shall be deemed to
      include, as applicable, any additional amounts which may be payable with respect to interest under
      Condition 8 or, except in the case of Interbolsa Notes, pursuant to any undertakings given in addition
      thereto or in substitution therefor pursuant to the Trust Deed.

7.    Redemption and Purchase

(a)   At Maturity

      Unless previously redeemed or purchased and cancelled as specified below, each Note will be
      redeemed by the Issuer at its Final Redemption Amount specified in, or determined in the manner
      specified in, the applicable Final Terms in the relevant Specified Currency on the Maturity Date
      specified in the Final Terms.

(b)   Redemption for Tax Reasons

      The Notes may be redeemed at the option of the Issuer (after obtaining the consent of the Bank of
      Portugal wherever it is required in the case of Subordinated Notes) in whole, but not in part, at any
      time (if this Note is not a Floating Rate Note) or on any Interest Payment Date (if this Note is a
      Floating Rate Note), on giving not less than the minimum period and not more than maximum period
      of notice specified in the applicable Final Terms notice to the Agent, the Trustee (except in respect
      of Interbolsa Notes), the Common Representative (in respect of Interbolsa Notes) and, in accordance
      with Condition 14, the Noteholders (which notice shall be irrevocable), if:



                                                   111
      (i)     on the occasion of the next payment due under the Notes, the Issuer has or will become
              obliged to pay additional amounts as provided or referred to in Condition 8 or the Bank
              (where the Issuer is BES Finance) would be unable for reasons outside its control to procure
              payment by BES Finance and in making payment itself would be required to pay such
              additional amounts, in either case as a result of any change in, or amendment to, the laws or
              regulations of any Relevant Tax Jurisdiction or any political subdivision or any authority
              thereof or therein having power to tax, or any change in the application or official
              interpretation of such laws or regulations, which change or amendment becomes effective on
              or after the Issue Date of the first Tranche of the Notes;

      (ii)    the Issuer satisfies the Trustee (except in the case of Interbolsa Notes) or the Common
              Representative and the Portuguese Paying Agent (in the case of Interbolsa Notes)
              immediately prior to the giving of such notice as to (i) above; and

      (iii)   such obligation cannot be avoided by the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
              Finance) taking reasonable measures available to it,

      provided that no such notice of redemption shall be given earlier than 90 days prior to the earliest
      date on which the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) would be obliged to pay such
      additional amounts were a payment in respect of the Notes then due.

      Prior to the publication of any notice of redemption pursuant to this Condition 7(b), the Issuer shall
      deliver to the Agent and the Common Representative (in respect of Interbolsa Notes) or to the
      Trustee (in respect of any Note other than an Interbolsa Note) to make available at their respective
      specified offices to the Noteholders (i) a certificate signed by two Directors of the Issuer or two
      Directors of the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) stating that the Issuer is entitled to effect
      such redemption and setting forth a statement of facts showing that the conditions precedent to the
      right of the Issuer so to redeem have occurred, and an opinion of independent legal advisers of
      recognised standing to the effect that the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) has or
      will become obliged to pay such additional amounts as a result of such change or amendment. The
      Trustee or, as the case may be, the Agent and the Common Representative, shall be entitled to accept
      any such certificate and (ii) an opinion delivered to it as sufficient evidence of the satisfaction of
      such conditions precedent in which event they shall be conclusive and binding on the Noteholders
      and the Couponholders.

      Notes redeemed pursuant to this Condition 7(b) will be redeemed at their Early Redemption Amount
      referred to in paragraph (e) below together (if appropriate) with interest accrued to (but excluding)
      the date of redemption.

      “Relevant Tax Jurisdiction” means (i), in respect of payments made by BES Finance, the Cayman
      Islands, (ii) in respect of payments where the Bank is specified in the applicable Final Terms as
      Issuer and is acting through its head office or its Madeira branch, Portugal; (iii) in respect of
      payments where the Bank is specified in the applicable Final Terms as Issuer and is acting through
      its Cayman Islands branch, the Cayman Islands; (iv) in respect of payments where the Bank is
      specified in the applicable Final Terms as Issuer and is acting through its Luxembourg branch,
      Luxembourg; and (v) in respect of payments made by the Bank, acting through its London branch,
      either as Issuer or as Guarantor where the Issuer is BES Finance, the United Kingdom.

(c)   Redemption at the Option of the Issuer (Issuer Call)

      If Issuer Call is specified as being applicable in the Final Terms, the Issuer shall (after obtaining the
      consent of the Bank of Portugal whenever it is required in the case of Subordinated Notes), having
      given:


                                                    112
(i)     not less than the minimum period nor more than the maximum period of notice to the
        Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14; and

(ii)    not less than 15 days before the giving of the notice referred to in (i), notice to the Agent and
        (except in respect of Interbolsa Notes) to the Trustee and (in respect of Interbolsa Notes) to
        the Common Representative,

(which notices shall be irrevocable), redeem all or some only of the Notes then outstanding on any
Optional Redemption Date and at the Optional Redemption Amount(s) specified in, or determined in
the manner specified in, the applicable Final Terms together, if appropriate, with interest accrued to
(but excluding) the relevant Optional Redemption Date. Any such redemption must be of a nominal
amount not less than the Minimum Redemption Amount and not more than a Higher Redemption
Amount, in each case as may be specified in the applicable Final Terms.

If "Sterling Make-Whole Redemption Amount" is specified in the applicable Final Terms as the
Optional Redemption Amount, the Optional Redemption Amount shall be equal to the higher of (i)
100 per cent. of the principal amount outstanding of the Notes to be redeemed or (ii) the principal
amount outstanding of the Notes to be redeemed multiplied by the price, as reported to the Issuer by
the Financial Adviser, at which the Gross Redemption Yield on such Notes on the Reference Date is
equal to the Gross Redemption Yield (determined by reference to the middle market price) at the
Quotation Time specified in the applicable Final Terms on the Reference Date of the Reference
Bond, plus the Redemption Margin, all as determined by the Financial Adviser.

If "Non-Sterling Make-Whole Redemption Amount" is specified in the applicable Final Terms as the
Optional Redemption Amount, the Optional Redemption Amount shall be an amount calculated by
the Agent equal to the higher of (i) 100 per cent. of the principal amount outstanding of the Notes to
be redeemed or (ii) the sum of the present values of the principal amount outstanding of the Notes to
be redeemed and the Remaining Term Interest on such Note (exclusive of interest accrued to the date
of redemption) discounted to the date of redemption on an annual basis at the Reference Bond Rate,
plus the Redemption Margin.

In this Condition 7(c):

"FA Selected Bond" means a government security or securities selected by the Financial Adviser as
having an actual or interpolated maturity comparable with the remaining term of the Notes that
would be utilised, at the time of selection and in accordance with customary financial practice, in
pricing new issues of corporate debt securities denominated in the same currency as the Notes and of
a comparable maturity to the remaining term of the Notes;

"Financial Adviser" means a financial adviser selected by the Issuer;

"Gross Redemption Yield" means, in respect of a security, the gross redemption yield for such
security, expressed as a percentage and calculated by the Financial Adviser on the basis set out by
the United Kingdom Debt Management Office in the paper Formulae for Calculating Gilt Prices
from Yields page 5, Section One: Price/Yield Formulae Conventional Gilts; Double-dated and
Undated Gilts with Assumed (or Actual) Redemption on a Quasi-Coupon Date (published
08/06/1998 and updated on 15/01/2002 and 16/03/2005 (as amended and supplemented from time to
time)) on a semi-annual compounding basis (converted to an annualised yield and rounded up (if
necessary) to four decimal places) or on such other basis as the Issuer may approve;

"Redemption Margin" shall be as set out in the applicable Final Terms;

"Reference Bond" shall be as set out in the applicable Final Terms or shall be the FA Selected Bond;



                                              113
      "Reference Bond Price" means, with respect to any date of redemption, (A) the arithmetic average of
      the Reference Government Bond Dealer Quotations for such date of redemption, after excluding the
      highest and lowest such Reference Government Bond Dealer Quotations, or (B) if the Agent obtains
      fewer than four such Reference Government Bond Dealer Quotations, the arithmetic average of all
      such quotations;

      "Reference Bond Rate" means, with respect to any date of redemption, the rate per annum equal to
      the annual or semi-annual yield (as the case may be) to maturity or interpolated yield to maturity (on
      the relevant day count basis) of the Reference Bond, assuming a price for the Reference Bond
      (expressed as a percentage of its nominal amount) equal to the Reference Bond Price for such date of
      redemption;

      "Reference Date" will be set out in the relevant notice of redemption;

      "Reference Government Bond Dealer" means each of five banks selected by the Issuer, or their
      affiliates, which are (A) primary government securities dealers, and their respective successors, or
      (B) market makers in pricing corporate bond issues;

      "Reference Government Bond Dealer Quotations" means, with respect to each Reference
      Government Bond Dealer and any date for redemption, the arithmetic average, as determined by the
      Agent, of the bid and offered prices for the Reference Bond (expressed in each case as a percentage
      of its nominal amount) at the Quotation Time specified in the applicable Final Terms on the
      Reference Date quoted in writing to the Agent by such Reference Government Bond Dealer; and

      "Remaining Term Interest" means, with respect to any Note, the aggregate amount of scheduled
      payment(s) of interest on such Note for the remaining term of such Note determined on the basis of
      the rate of interest applicable to such Note from and including the date on which such Note is to be
      redeemed by the Issuer pursuant to this Condition.

      All notifications, opinions, determinations, certifications, calculations, quotations and decisions
      given, expressed, made or obtained for the purposes of this Condition by the Agent, shall (in the
      absence of negligence, wilful default or bad faith) be binding on the Issuer, the Agent, the Paying
      Agents and all Noteholders and Couponholders.

      In the case of a partial redemption of Notes, the Notes to be redeemed (“Redeemed Notes”) will, not
      more than 30 days prior to the date fixed for redemption (such date of selection being hereinafter
      called the “Selection Date”), be selected (i) individually by lot, in the case of Redeemed Notes
      represented by definitive Notes, (ii) in accordance with the rules of Euroclear and/ or Clearstream,
      Luxembourg (to be reflected in the records of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg as either a
      pool factor or a reduction in nominal amount, at their discretion), in the case of Redeemed Notes
      represented by a global Note and (iii) in accordance with the rules of Interbolsa, in the case of
      Redeemed Notes that are Interbolsa Notes. In the case of Redeemed Notes represented by definitive
      Notes, a list of the serial numbers of such Redeemed Notes will be published in accordance with
      Condition 14 not less than 15 days prior to the date fixed for redemption. No exchange of the
      relevant global Note will be permitted during the period from and including the Selection Date to
      and including the date fixed for redemption pursuant to this paragraph (c) and notice to that effect
      shall be given by the Issuer to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 at least five days
      prior to the Selection Date.

(d)   Redemption at the Option of the Noteholders (Investor Put)

      If Investor Put is specified as being applicable in the Final Terms (provided that Investor Put may
      not be specified if this is a Subordinated Note), upon the holder of any Note giving to the Issuer in


                                                   114
       accordance with Condition 14 not less than the minimum period nor more than the maximum period
       of notice specified in the applicable Final Terms (which notice shall be irrevocable), the Issuer will,
       upon the expiry of such notice, redeem, subject to, and in accordance with, the terms specified in the
       applicable Final Terms, in whole (but not in part), such Note on the Optional Redemption Date and
       at the Optional Redemption Amount specified in the applicable Final Terms together, if appropriate,
       with interest accrued to (but excluding) the Optional Redemption Date.

       If this Note is in definitive form, to exercise the right to require redemption of this Note the holder of
       this Note must deliver such Note at the specified office of any Paying Agent at any time during
       normal business hours of such Paying Agent falling within the notice period, accompanied by a duly
       completed and signed notice of exercise in the form (for the time being current) obtainable from any
       specified office of any Paying Agent (a “Eurobond Put Notice”) and in which the holder must
       specify a bank account (or, if payment is by cheque, an address) to which payment is to be made
       under this Condition accompanied by, if this Note is in definitive form, this Note or evidence
       satisfactory to the Paying Agent concerned that this Note will, following delivery of the Put Notice,
       be held to its order or under its control.

       If this Note is an Interbolsa Note, to exercise the right to require redemption of this Note the holder
       of this Note must, during normal business hours on a day falling within the notice period, deliver to
       the Portuguese Paying Agent a Certificate and a duly completed and signed notice of exercise in the
       form obtainable from the specified office of the Portuguese Paying Agent (an “Interbolsa Notes Put
       Notice”, each Interbolsa Notes Put Notice or Eurobond Put Notice being a “Put Notice”) and in
       which the holder of the Notes must specify a bank account or, if payment is required to be made by
       cheque, an address to which payment is to be made under this Condition.

(e)    Early Redemption Amounts

       For the purpose of paragraph (b) above and Condition 10, the Notes will be redeemed at the Early
       Redemption Amount calculated as follows:

       (i)     in the case of Notes with a Final Redemption Amount equal to the Issue Price, at the Final
               Redemption Amount thereof;

       (ii)    in the case of Notes (other than Zero Coupon Notes) with a Final Redemption Amount
               which is or may be less or greater than the Issue Price or which is payable in a Specified
               Currency other than that in which the Notes are denominated, at the amount specified in the
               applicable Final Terms or, if no such amount or manner is so specified in the Final Terms, at
               their nominal amount; or

       (iii)   in the case of a Zero Coupon Note, at an amount (the “Amortised Face Amount”) calculated
               in accordance with the following formula:

                                                             y
                Early Redemption Amount  RP x (1  AY)

               where:

               “RP” means the Reference Price specified in the applicable Final Terms;

               “AY” means the Accrual Yield expressed as a decimal; and

“y” is the Day Count Fraction specified in the applicable Final Terms which will be either (i) 30/360 (in
which case the numerator will be equal to the number of days (calculated on the basis of a 360-day year
consisting of 12 months of 30 days each) from (and including) the Issue Date of the first Tranche of the


                                                      115
Notes to (but excluding) the date fixed for redemption or (as the case may be) the date upon which such Note
becomes due and repayable and the denominator will be 360) or (ii) Actual/360 (in which case the numerator
will be equal to the actual number of days from (and including) the Issue Date of the first Tranche of the
Notes to (but excluding) the date fixed for redemption or (as the case may be) the date upon which such Note
becomes due and repayable and the denominator will be 360) or (iii) Actual/365 (in which case the
numerator will be equal to the actual number of days from (and including) the Issue Date of the first Tranche
of the Notes to (but excluding) the date fixed for redemption or (as the case may be) the date upon which
such Note becomes due and repayable and the denominator will be 365).

(f)     Purchases

        The Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or any of its Subsidiaries (as defined in the
        Principal Agency Agreement) may (after obtaining the consent of the Bank of Portugal whenever it
        is required in the case of Subordinated Guaranteed Notes) at any time purchase Notes (provided that,
        in the case of definitive Notes, all unmatured Coupons and Talons appertaining thereto are purchased
        therewith) at any price in the open market or otherwise. Such Notes may be held, reissued, resold or,
        at the option of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), surrendered to any Paying
        Agent for cancellation or, in the case of Interbolsa Notes, cancelled by Interbolsa following receipt
        by Interbolsa of notice thereof by the Portuguese Paying Agent.

(g)     Cancellation

        All global Notes and definitive Notes which are redeemed will forthwith be cancelled (together with
        all unmatured Coupons attached thereto or surrendered therewith at the time of redemption). All
        global Notes and definitive Notes so cancelled and the global Notes and definitive Notes purchased
        and cancelled pursuant to paragraph (f) above (together with all unmatured Coupons cancelled
        therewith) shall be forwarded to the Agent and cannot be reissued or resold.

        All Interbolsa Notes which are (a) redeemed or (b) purchased by or on behalf of the Issuer or the
        Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or any of its Subsidiaries will forthwith be cancelled, by
        Interbolsa following receipt by Interbolsa of notice thereof by the Portuguese Paying Agent, and
        accordingly such Interbolsa Notes may not be held, reissued or resold and shall not entitle the holder
        to vote at any meetings of the Noteholders and shall not be deemed to be outstanding for the
        purposes of calculating quorums at meetings of the Noteholders or for the purposes of Condition 15
        or the Principal Agency Agreement, as amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement.

(h)     Late payment on Zero Coupon Notes

        If the amount payable in respect of any Zero Coupon Note upon redemption of such Zero Coupon
        Note pursuant to paragraph 7(a), (b), (c) or (d) above or upon its becoming due and repayable as
        provided in Condition 10 is improperly withheld or refused, the amount due and repayable in respect
        of such Zero Coupon Note shall be the amount calculated as provided in paragraph 7(e)(iii) above as
        though the references therein to the date fixed for the redemption or the date upon which such Zero
        Coupon Note becomes due and payable were replaced by references to the date which is the earlier
        of:

        (i)     the date on which all amounts due in respect of such Zero Coupon Note have been paid; and

        (ii)    the fifth day after the date on which the full amount of the moneys payable has been
                received by the Agent or (except in the case of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee or (in the case
                of Interbolsa Notes) the Portuguese Paying Agent and notice to that effect has been given to
                the Noteholders either in accordance with Condition 14 or individually.




                                                     116
8.   Taxation

     All payments of principal and interest in respect of the Notes and Coupons by BES Finance or the
     Bank will be made without withholding or deduction for or on account of any present or future taxes
     or duties of whatever nature imposed or levied by or on behalf of any Relevant Tax Jurisdiction as
     defined in Condition 7(b) or any political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having
     power to tax unless such withholding or deduction is required by law. In such event, BES Finance or
     the Bank will pay such additional amounts as shall be necessary in order that the net amounts
     received by the holders of the Notes or Coupons after such withholding or deduction shall equal the
     respective amounts of principal and interest which would otherwise have been receivable in respect
     of the Notes or Coupons, as the case may be, in the absence of such withholding or deduction;
     except that no such additional amounts shall be payable with respect to any Note or Coupon:

     (i)     the Noteholder or Couponholder of which is liable to such taxes, duties, assessments or
             governmental charges in respect of such Note or Coupon by reason of its having some
             connection with the Relevant Tax Jurisdiction by which such taxes, duties, assessments or
             charges have been imposed, levied, collected, withheld or assessed other than the mere
             holding of the Note or Coupon; and/or

     (ii)    where such withholding or deduction is imposed on a payment to or for an individual and is
             required to be made pursuant to European Council Directive 2003/48/EC or any law
             implementing or complying with, or introduced in order to conform to, such Directive;
             and/or

     (iii)   in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Noteholder or Couponholder of
             which would be able to avoid such withholding or deduction by presenting the relevant Note
             or Coupon to another Paying Agent in a Member State of the European Union; and/or

     (iv)    in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, a Noteholder or
             Couponholder in respect of whom the information and documentation (which may include
             certificates) required in order to comply with Portuguese Decree-Law 193/2005 of 7th
             November, 2005, and any implementing legislation, is not received before the Income
             Payment Date or which does not comply with the formalities in order to benefit from tax
             treaty benefits, where applicable; and/or

     (v)     in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, a Noteholder or
             Couponholder resident for tax purposes in the Republic of Portugal or any political
             subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax or a resident in a tax
             haven jurisdiction as defined in Order 150/2004, of 13th February, 2004 (Portaria do
             Ministro das Finanças e da Administração Pública no 150/2004) as amended from time to
             time, issued by the Portuguese Minister of Finance and Public Administration, with the
             exception of central banks and governmental agencies of those blacklisted jurisdictions, or a
             non-resident legal entity held, directly or indirectly, in more than 20 per cent. by entities
             resident in the Republic of Portugal; and/or

     (vi)    in the case of Interbolsa Notes, to, or to a third party on behalf of, (i) a Portuguese resident
             legal entity subject to Portuguese corporation tax with the exception of entities that benefit
             from a Portuguese withholding tax waiver or from Portuguese income tax exemptions, or (ii)
             a legal entity not resident in Portugal acting with respect to the holding of the Notes through
             a permanent establishment in Portugal; and/or

     (vii)   in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, where presentation of the Note or
             Coupon is required, presented for payment more than 30 days after the Relevant Date except


                                                   117
              to the extent that the holder thereof would have been entitled to an additional amount on
              presenting the same for payment on such thirtieth day, assuming that day to have been a
              Payment Day (as defined in Condition 6).

      As used herein, the “Relevant Date” means the date on which such payment first becomes due,
      except that, if the full amount of the moneys payable has not been duly received by the Agent or
      (other than in the case of Interbolsa Notes) the Trustee on or prior to such due date, it means the date
      on which, the full amount of such moneys having been so received, notice to that effect is duly given
      to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14.

9.    Prescription

      The global Notes, definitive Notes and Coupons will become void unless claims in respect of
      principal and/or interest are made within a period of 10 years (in the case of principal) and five years
      (in the case of interest) after the Relevant Date (as defined in Condition 8) therefor.

      There shall not be included in any Coupon sheet issued on exchange of a Talon any Coupon the
      claim for payment in respect of which would be void pursuant to this Condition 9 or Condition 6(c)
      or any Talon which itself would be void pursuant to Condition 6(c).

      Claims for principal and interest in respect of the Interbolsa Notes shall become void unless the
      relevant Certificates are surrendered within 20 years and five years respectively of the Relevant
      Date.

10.   Events of Default

(A)   This Condition 10(A) applies only to Senior Notes and in this Condition 10(A) references to “Notes”
      shall be construed accordingly.

      If any one or more of the following events (each an “Event of Default”) shall occur and be
      continuing:

      (i)     default is made in the payment in the Specified Currency of any principal or interest due in
              respect of the Notes or any of them and such default continues, in the case of principal, for a
              period of five Portuguese Business Days or, in the case of interest, for a period of 10
              Portuguese Business Days; or

      (ii)    the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) fails to perform or observe any of
              its other obligations in respect of the Notes or, in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa
              Notes, under the Trust Deed and (except where, (a) for Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, in
              the opinion of the Trustee, or (b) for Interbolsa Notes, in the opinion of the Common
              Representative, such default is not capable of remedy where no such continuation or notice
              as is hereinafter referred to will be required) such failure continues for the period of 30 days
              (or such longer period as the Trustee (in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes) or the
              Common Representative (in respect of Interbolsa Notes), may permit) after notice has been
              given to the Issuer or, as the case may be, the Bank requiring the same to be remedied; or

      (iii)   the repayment of any indebtedness owing by the Issuer or by the Bank (where the Issuer is
              BES Finance) is accelerated by reason of default and such acceleration has not been
              rescinded or annulled, or the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) defaults
              (after whichever is the longer of any originally applicable period of grace and 14 days after
              the due date) in any payment of any indebtedness or in the honouring of any guarantee or
              indemnity in respect of any indebtedness provided that no such event shall constitute an
              Event of Default unless the indebtedness whether alone or when aggregated with other

                                                    118
         indebtedness relating to all (if any) other such events which shall have occurred shall exceed
         U.S.$10,000,000 (or its equivalent in any other currency or currencies) or, if greater, an
         amount equal to 1 per cent. of the Bank’s Shareholders’ Funds; or

(iv)     any order shall be made by any competent court or resolution passed for the winding up or
         dissolution of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) (other than for the
         purpose of an amalgamation, merger or reconstruction approved (i) by the Trustee or by an
         Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa
         Notes or (ii) by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders in the case of Interbolsa
         Notes); or

(v)      the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall cease to carry on the whole or
         substantially the whole of its business (other than for the purpose of an amalgamation,
         merger or reconstruction approved (i) by the Trustee or by an Extraordinary Resolution of
         the Noteholders in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes or (ii) by an
         Extraordinary Resolution (as described in Condition 15(b)) of the Noteholders in the case of
         Interbolsa Notes); or

(vi)     the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall stop payment or shall be
         unable to, or shall admit inability to, pay its debts as they fall due, or shall be adjudicated or
         found bankrupt or insolvent by a court of competent jurisdiction or shall make a conveyance
         or assignment for the benefit of, or shall enter into any composition or other arrangement
         with, its creditors generally; or

(vii)    a receiver, trustee or other similar official shall be appointed in relation to the Issuer or the
         Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) or in relation to the whole or a substantial part of the
         assets of either of them or a temporary manager of the Bank is appointed by the Bank of
         Portugal or an encumbrancer shall take possession of the whole or a substantial part of the
         assets of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance), or a distress or execution
         or other process shall be levied or enforced upon or sued out against the whole or a
         substantial part of the assets of either of them and in any of the foregoing cases it or he shall
         not be discharged within 60 days; or

(viii)   the Bank sells, transfers, lends or otherwise disposes of the whole or a major part of its
         undertaking or assets (including shareholdings in its Subsidiaries or associated companies)
         and such disposal is substantial in relation to the assets of the Bank and its Subsidiaries as a
         whole, other than selling, transferring, lending or otherwise disposing on an arm’s length
         basis; or

(ix)     except where the Issuer has been substituted as principal debtor pursuant to Condition 18,
         the Issuer (where the Issuer is BES Finance) ceases to be a Subsidiary wholly owned and
         controlled, directly or indirectly, by the Bank; or

(x)      (where the Issuer is BES Finance) the Guarantee is terminated or shall cease to be in full
         force and effect,

then:

(a)      in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trustee at its discretion may, and if so
         requested in writing by the holders of not less than 20 per cent. of the nominal amount of the
         Notes then outstanding or if so directed by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders
         shall (subject in each case to being indemnified to its satisfaction), give notice to the Issuer
         that the Notes are, and they shall accordingly thereby forthwith become, immediately due


                                               119
              and repayable at their Early Redemption Amount (as described in Condition 7(e)) together
              with accrued interest (as provided in the Trust Deed) provided that, in the case of any such
              Events of Default other than those described in sub-paragraphs 0 and 0 above, the Trustee
              shall have certified to the Issuer that such Event of Default is in its opinion materially
              prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders; or

      (b)     in respect of any Interbolsa Notes, the Common Representative shall, if so requested in
              writing through a request addressed to it and to the Bank by the holders of not less than 20
              per cent. of the nominal amount of the Notes then outstanding, or if so directed by an
              Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders, give notice to the Issuer (the “Acceleration
              Notice”) and to the Portuguese Paying Agent at the respective specified office, effective
              upon the date of receipt thereof by the Portuguese Paying Agent, that the Interbolsa Notes
              are, and they shall accordingly thereby forthwith become, immediately due and payable at
              the Early Redemption Amount (as described in Condition 7(e)) together with accrued
              interest (if any) to the date of repayment, without demand, protest or other notice of any
              kind.

      As used above:

      “Bank’s Shareholders’ Funds” means, at any relevant time, a sum equal to the aggregate of the
      Bank’s shareholders’ equity as certified by the Auditors (as defined in the Paying Agency
      Agreement) of the Bank by reference to the latest audited consolidated financial statements of the
      Bank; and

      “Portuguese Business Day” means a day on which commercial banks are open for business in
      Lisbon.

(B)   This Condition 10(B) applies only to Subordinated Notes and in this Condition 10(B) references to
      “Notes” shall be construed accordingly.

      If any one or more of the following events (each an “Event of Default”) shall occur:

      (i)     default is made in the payment of any principal or interest due in respect of the Notes or any
              of them and such default continues, in the case of principal, for a period of five Portuguese
              Business Days (as defined in Condition 10(A)) or, in the case of interest, for a period of 10
              Portuguese Business Days; or

      (ii)    any order shall be made by any competent court or resolution passed for the winding up or
              dissolution of the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) (other than for the
              purpose of an amalgamation, merger or reconstruction approved by the Trustee (except in
              the case of Interbolsa Notes) or by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders), then:

              (a)      in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes the Trustee at its discretion may, and
                       if so requested in writing by the holders of not less than 20 per cent. of the nominal
                       amount of the Notes then outstanding or if so directed by an Extraordinary
                       Resolution of the Noteholders shall (subject in each case to being indemnified to its
                       satisfaction), give notice to the Issuer that the Notes are, and they shall accordingly
                       thereby forthwith become, immediately due and repayable at their Early Redemption
                       Amount (as described in Condition 7(e)) together with accrued interest (as provided
                       in the Trust Deed); or

              (b)      in respect of any Interbolsa Notes, the Common Representative shall, if so requested
                       in writing through a request addressed to it and to the Bank by the holders of not less
                       than 20 per cent. of the nominal amount of the Notes then outstanding, or if so

                                                    120
                      directed by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders, give notice to the Issuer
                      (the “Acceleration Notice”) and to the Portuguese Paying Agent at the respective
                      specified office, effective upon the date of receipt thereof by the Portuguese Paying
                      Agent, that the Interbolsa Notes are, and they shall accordingly thereby forthwith
                      become, immediately due and payable at the Early Redemption Amount (as
                      described in Condition 7(e)) together with accrued interest (if any) to the date of
                      repayment, without demand, protest or other notice of any kind.

      Notwithstanding the giving of any such notice that the Subordinated Notes are immediately due and
      repayable, the Issuer may only redeem such Notes with the prior approval of the Bank of Portugal.

      There can be no assurance that the Bank of Portugal will give its approval to any such redemption.
      Noteholders should be aware of the fact that the Bank of Portugal’s approval will depend on the
      capital adequacy of the Bank.

11.   Replacement of global Notes, definitive Notes, Coupons and Talons

      Should any global Note, definitive Note, Coupon or Talon be lost, stolen, mutilated, defaced or
      destroyed, it may be replaced at the specified office of the Agent upon payment by the claimant of
      such costs and expenses as may be incurred in connection therewith and on such terms as to
      evidence and indemnity as the Issuer may reasonably require. Mutilated or defaced global Notes,
      definitive Notes, Coupons or Talons must be surrendered before replacements will be issued.

12.   Agent and Paying Agents

      The names of the initial Agent and the other initial Paying Agents and their initial specified offices
      are set out below. If any additional Paying Agents are appointed in connection with any Series, the
      names of such Paying Agents will be specified in Part B of the applicable Final Terms.

      The Issuer and the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) are entitled (with the prior written
      consent of the Trustee, save that such consent will not be required in respect of the Portuguese
      Paying Agent) to vary or terminate the appointment of any Paying Agent and/or appoint additional
      or other Paying Agents and/ or approve any change in the specified office through which any Paying
      Agent acts, provided that:

      (i)     so long as the Notes are listed on any stock exchange or admitted to listing by any relevant
              authority, there will at all times be a Paying Agent with a specified office in such place as
              may be required by the rules and regulations of the relevant stock exchange or such other
              relevant authority;

      (ii)    there will at all times be maintained a Paying Agent in a Member State of the European
              Union that is not obliged to withhold or deduct tax pursuant to European Council Directive
              2003/48/ EC or any law implementing or complying with, or introduced in order to conform
              to, such Directive;

      (iii)   there will at all times be a Paying Agent outside the United Kingdom and Portugal
              (including Madeira); and

      (iv)    there will at all times be a Paying Agent in Portugal capable of making payment in respect of
              the Interbolsa Notes as contemplated by these terms and conditions, the Principal Agency
              Agreement, as amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement and applicable
              Portuguese law and regulation.




                                                   121
      In addition, the Issuer and the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) shall forthwith appoint a
      Paying Agent having a specified office in New York City in the circumstances described in the final
      paragraph of Condition 6(e)(b). Notice of any variation, termination, appointment or change in
      Paying Agents be given to the Noteholders promptly by the Issuer in accordance with Condition 14.

13.   Exchange of Talons

      On and after the Interest Payment Date on which the final Coupon comprised in any Coupon sheet
      matures, the Talon (if any) forming part of such Coupon sheet may be surrendered at the specified
      office of the Agent or any other Paying Agent in exchange for a further Coupon sheet including (if
      such further Coupon sheet does not include Coupons to (and including) the final date for the
      payment of interest due in respect of the Note to which it appertains) a further Talon, subject to the
      provisions of Condition 9.

14.   Notices

      All notices regarding the Notes shall be published (i) in a leading English language daily newspaper
      of general circulation in London, (ii) if and for so long as the Notes are listed on the Official List of
      the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and admitted to trading on the regulated market of the
      Luxembourg Stock Exchange, in a daily newspaper of general circulation in Luxembourg and (iii) if
      the Notes are Interbolsa Notes, by registered mail, by publication in a leading newspaper having
      general circulation in Portugal (which is expected to be Diàrio de Notícias) or by any other way
      which complies with the Portuguese Securities Code and Interbolsa’s rules on notices to investors,
      including the disclosure of information through the CMVM official website (www.cmvm.pt). It is
      expected that publication under (i) and (ii) above will be made in the Financial Times or any other
      daily newspaper in London (which, unless such Notice is given in respect of Interbolsa Notes only,
      shall be approved by the Trustee) and the Luxemburger Wort in Luxembourg, respectively. In
      addition, all notices regarding the Notes may be published on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s
      web site (www.bourse.lu). The Issuer shall also ensure that notices are duly published in a manner
      which complies with the rules and regulations of any other stock exchange or any other relevant
      authority on which the Notes are for the time being listed or by which they have been admitted to
      trading. Any such notice will be deemed to have been given on the date of the first publication or,
      where required to be published in more than one newspaper, on the date of the first publication in all
      the required newspapers.

      Until such time as any definitive Notes are issued, there may (provided that, in the case of Notes
      listed on a stock exchange or admitted to listing by another relevant authority, the rules of such stock
      exchange or other relevant authority permits), so long any the global Note(s) is or are held in its/their
      entirety on behalf of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg, be substituted for such publication in
      such newspaper(s) the delivery of the relevant notice to Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg for
      communication by them to the holders of the Notes and, in addition, for so long as any Notes are
      listed on a stock exchange or are admitted to trading by another relevant authority and the rules of
      that stock exchange or relevant authority so require, such notice will be published in a daily
      newspaper of general circulation in the place or places required by those rules. Any such notice shall
      be deemed to have been given to the holders of the Notes on such day as is specified in the
      applicable Final Terms after the day on which the said notice was given to Euroclear and
      Clearstream, Luxembourg. However, all notices regarding Notes which are listed on the Official List
      of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and admitted to trading on the regulated market of the
      Luxembourg Stock Exchange must be published in a daily newspaper of general circulation in
      Luxembourg which is expected to be the “Luxemburger Wort”.

      Notices to be given by any holder of the Notes shall be in writing and given by lodging the same
      with the Portuguese Paying Agent in the case of Interbolsa Notes and by lodging the same, together


                                                    122
      with the relative Note or Notes, with the Agent in the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa
      Notes. Whilst any of the Notes are represented by a global Note, such notice may be given by any
      holder of a Note to the Agent via Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, in
      such manner as the Agent and Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg, as the case may be, may
      approve for this purpose.

      Any holder of an Interbolsa Note may give notice to the Portuguese Paying Agent and the Agent
      through Interbolsa in such manner as the Portuguese Paying Agent, the Agent and Interbolsa may
      approve for this purpose.

15.   Meetings of Noteholders, Modification and Waiver

(a)   Meetings in respect of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes

      This Condition 15(a) does not apply to Interbolsa Notes. The Trust Deed contains provisions for
      convening meetings of the Noteholders to consider any matter affecting their interests, including the
      sanctioning by Extraordinary Resolution of a modification of the terms and conditions of the Notes,
      the Coupons or any of the provisions of the Trust Deed. Such a meeting may be convened by the
      Issuer or Noteholders holding not less than 5 per cent. in nominal amount of the Notes for the time
      being remaining outstanding. The quorum at any such meeting for passing an Extraordinary
      Resolution is one or more persons holding or representing not less than a clear majority in nominal
      amount of the Notes for the time being outstanding, or at any adjourned meeting one or more
      persons being or representing Noteholders whatever the nominal amount of the Notes so held or
      represented, except that at any meeting the business of which includes the modification of certain
      provisions of the Notes or Coupons (including modifying the date of maturity of the Notes or any
      date for payment of interest thereof, reducing or cancelling the amount of principal on maturity or
      otherwise, modification of any Minimum Rate of Interest or Maximum Rate of Interest or altering
      the currency of payment of the Notes or Coupons, modification of the majority required to pass an
      Extraordinary Resolution or modification of the Trust Deed concerning this exception), the quorum
      shall be one or more persons holding or representing not less than two-thirds, or at any adjourned
      such meeting one or more persons holding or representing not less than one-third, in nominal amount
      of the Notes for the time being outstanding. An Extraordinary Resolution passed at any meeting of
      the Noteholders shall be binding on all the Noteholders, whether or not they are present at the
      meeting, and on all Couponholders.

      The Trustee and the Issuer may agree, without the consent of the Noteholders or Couponholders, to:

      (i)     any modification (except as mentioned above) of the Notes, the Coupons or the Trust Deed
              which is not, in the opinion of the Trustee, materially prejudicial to the interests of the
              Noteholders; or

      (ii)    any modification of the Notes, the Coupons or the Trust Deed which is of a formal, minor or
              technical nature or is made to correct a manifest error or to comply with mandatory
              provisions of the law of the jurisdiction in which the Issuer is incorporated.

      Any such modification shall be binding on the Noteholders and the Couponholders and any such
      modification shall be notified to the Noteholders in accordance with Condition 14 as soon as
      practicable thereafter.

      The Trustee may also waive or authorise any breach or proposed breach of any of the provisions of
      the Trust Deed or any of these Terms and Conditions which, in the opinion of the Trustee, is not
      materially prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders.




                                                  123
      In connection with the exercise by it of any of its trusts, powers or discretions (including, without
      limitation, any modification, waiver, authorisation or substitution), the Trustee shall have regard to
      the general interests of the Noteholders as a class and shall not have regard to any interests arising
      from circumstances particular to individual Noteholders (whatever their number) and, in particular,
      but without limitation, shall not have regard to the consequences of the exercise of its trusts, powers
      or discretions for individual Noteholders or Couponholders (whatever their number) resulting from
      their being for any purpose domiciled or resident in, or otherwise connected with, or subject to the
      jurisdiction of, any particular territory and the Trustee shall not be entitled to require, nor shall any
      Noteholder or Couponholder be entitled to claim, from the Issuer, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
      Finance) or any other person any indemnification or payment in respect of any tax consequence of
      any such exercise upon individual Noteholders or Couponholders except to the extent already
      provided for in Condition 8 and/or any undertaking given in addition to, or in substitution for,
      Condition 8 pursuant to the Trust Deed.

      Nothing in these Terms and Conditions or the Trust Deed shall require the Trustee to have regard to
      the interests of Noteholders insofar as those interests arise by virtue of a holding of Interbolsa Notes.
      For the avoidance of doubt, without prejudice to any rights assumed under Notes which are not
      Interbolsa Notes, a holder of Interbolsa Notes shall neither, by virtue of such holding of Interbolsa
      Notes, count towards a quorum, nor be entitled to vote, in respect of a resolution to amend the Trust
      Deed.

(b)   Meetings in respect of Interbolsa Notes

      The remainder of this Condition 15 applies only to Interbolsa Notes.

      Meetings

      Meetings of the holders of Interbolsa Notes may be convened to consider any matter affecting their
      interests, including the appointment or dismissal of the Common Representative and the sanctioning
      by Extraordinary Resolution of a modification of the terms and conditions of the Notes and are
      governed by the Portuguese Commercial Companies Code enacted by Decree-Law 262/86 of 2nd
      September, as amended, and by the Common Representative Appointment Agreement.

      Such meetings may be convened by the Common Representative (if any) or, if no Common
      Representative has been appointed, or an appointed Common Representative fails to convene a
      meeting, by the chairman of the general meeting of shareholders of the Issuer, and shall be convened
      if requested by Noteholders holding not less than 5 per cent. in principal amount of the Notes for the
      time being outstanding.

      The quorum required for a meeting convened to pass a resolution other than an Extraordinary
      Resolution will be any person or persons holding or representing Notes then outstanding, regardless
      of the principal amount thereof. The quorum required for a meeting convened to pass an
      Extraordinary Resolution will be a person or persons holding or representing at least 50 per cent. of
      the Notes then outstanding or, at any adjourned meeting, any person or persons holding or
      representing any of the Notes then outstanding, regardless of the principal amount thereof.

      The number of votes required to pass a resolution other than an Extraordinary Resolution is a
      majority of the votes cast at the relevant meeting. The majority required to pass an Extraordinary
      Resolution is at least 50 per cent. of the principal amount of the Notes then outstanding or, at any
      adjourned meeting, two- thirds of the votes cast at the relevant meeting.

      Resolutions passed at any meeting of the Noteholders will be binding on all Noteholders, whether or
      not they are present at the meeting or have voted against the approved resolutions.


                                                    124
      Dismissal and substitution of the Common Representative

      The Noteholders may dismiss and substitute the Common Representative by means of a resolution
      passed for such purpose upon the terms and conditions of the Common Representative Appointment
      Agreement.

      Notification

      Any modification, abrogation, waiver or authorisation in accordance with this Condition 15 shall be
      binding on the Noteholders and shall be notified by the Issuer to the Noteholders as soon as
      practicable thereafter in accordance with Condition 14 (Notices).

      Matters required to be approved by Extraordinary Resolution

      An Extraordinary Resolution will be required to effect any of the following:

      (i)     to change any date fixed for payment of principal or interest in respect of the Notes,
              reduction of the amount of principal or interest due on any date in respect of the Notes or
              variation of the method of calculating the amount of any payment in respect of the Notes on
              redemption or maturity;

      (ii)    to approve the modification or abrogation of any of the provisions of these Terms and
              Conditions;

      (iii)   to approve any amendment of this definition;

      (iv)    to waive or authorise any breach or proposed breach of any of these Terms and Conditions;
              and

      (v)     to approve any other matter in respect of which these Terms and Conditions require an
              Extraordinary Resolution to be passed.

      Matters in the discretion of the Agent and the Issuer

      Except for those matters required to be approved by Extraordinary Resolution, the Agent, the
      Common Representative and the Issuer may agree, without the consent of the Noteholders, to:

      (i)     any modification of the Notes which is not materially prejudicial to the interests of the
              Noteholders; or

      (ii)    any modification of the Notes which is of a formal, minor or technical nature or is made to
              correct a manifest error or to comply with mandatory provisions of the law of the
              jurisdiction in which the Issuer is incorporated.

      Any such modification shall be binding on the Noteholders and shall be notified to the Noteholders
      in accordance with Condition 14 as soon as practicable thereafter.

16.   Further Issues

      The Issuer shall be at liberty from time to time without the consent of the Noteholders or
      Couponholders to create and issue further notes having terms and conditions the same as the Notes
      or the same in all respects save for the amount and date of the first payment of interest thereon (the
      “Further Notes”) and so that the same shall be consolidated and form a single Series with the
      outstanding Notes.


                                                   125
      In the case of bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trust Deed contains provisions for
      convening a single meeting of the Noteholders and the holders of notes of other Series of bearer
      Notes other than Interbolsa Notes in certain circumstances where the Trustee so decides.

17.   Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999

      This Condition applies if the Notes are governed by English law. No rights are conferred on any
      person under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999 to enforce any term of the Notes, but
      this does not affect any right or remedy of any person which exists or is available apart from that
      Act.

18.   Substitution

      In the case of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trustee may, without the consent of the
      Noteholders or the Couponholders but (in the case of Subordinated Notes) only with the prior
      consent of the Bank of Portugal, agree with the Issuer and the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
      Finance) to the substitution in place of the Issuer (or of any previous substitute under this Condition)
      as the principal debtor in respect of the Notes of either the Bank or another whollyowned Subsidiary
      of the Bank, subject to:

      (a)     where the new principal debtor is a wholly-owned Subsidiary of the Bank, the Notes being
              unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by the Bank on the same basis as that on which
              they were guaranteed prior to the substitution (where, immediately prior to the substitution,
              the Issuer is BES Finance or (being a previous substitute under this Condition) another
              wholly- owned subsidiary of the Bank) or on an equivalent basis to that on which they
              would have been guaranteed immediately prior to the substitution had the Issuer been BES
              Finance (where immediately prior to the substitution, the Issuer is the Bank);

      (b)     the Trustee being satisfied that the interests of the Noteholders will not be materially
              prejudiced by the substitution; and

      (c)     certain other conditions set out in the Trust Deed being complied with.

      Any such substitution shall be notified, if the Notes are listed on the Official List of the Luxembourg
      Stock Exchange or any other stock exchange, to such stock exchange and to the Noteholders in
      accordance with Condition 14.

19.   Enforcement

      In the case of Notes other than Interbolsa Notes, the Trustee may at any time, at its discretion and
      without notice, take such proceedings against the Issuer and/or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES
      Finance) as it may think fit to enforce the provisions of the Trust Deed, the Notes and the Coupons,
      but it shall not be bound to take any such proceedings or any other action in relation to the Trust
      Deed, the Notes or the Coupons unless:

      (a)     it shall have been so directed by an Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders or so
              requested in writing by the holders of at least 20 per cent. in nominal amount of the Notes
              then outstanding; and

      (b)     it shall have been indemnified to its satisfaction.

      No Noteholder or Couponholder shall be entitled to take proceedings directly against the Issuer or
      the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) unless the Trustee, having become bound to proceed in



                                                    126
      accordance with the terms of the Trust Deed fails to do so within a reasonable time and such failure
      is continuing.

      In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the Common Representative may at any time, or, if so directed by an
      Extraordinary Resolution of the Noteholders or so requested in writing by the holders of at least 20
      per cent. in nominal amount of the Notes then outstanding, shall, take such proceedings against the
      Issuer as it may think fit to enforce the provisions of the Notes.

20.   Indemnification of Trustee

      The Trust Deed contains provisions for the indemnification of the Trustee and for its relief from
      responsibility, including provisions relieving it from any obligation to take proceedings to enforce
      repayment unless indemnified to its satisfaction. The Trustee is entitled to enter into business
      transactions with the Issuer and/or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) without accounting
      for any profit resulting therefrom and to act as trustee for the holders of any other securities issued
      by the Issuer or the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance).

21.   Governing law and submission to jurisdiction

(a)   The Trust Deed (except clause 7 insofar as it relates to Subordinated Notes), the Principal Agency
      Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes
      Agency Agreement, bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes (except Condition 2(ii) in relation to
      the Bank only (whether in its capacity as issuer or guarantor), and Condition 4(ii)) and the Coupons
      (and any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed (except
      clause 7 insofar as it relates to Subordinated Notes), the Principal Agency Agreement except, in
      respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement,
      bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes (except Condition 2(ii) in relation to the Bank only
      (whether in its capacity as issuer or guarantor), and Condition 4(ii)) and the Coupons) are governed
      by, and shall be construed in accordance with, English law.

      Interbolsa Notes, clause 7 of the Trust Deed (insofar as it relates to Subordinated Notes), the
      Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the
      Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and
      Condition 2(ii) in relation to the Bank only (whether in its capacity as issuer or guarantor) and
      Condition 4(ii) (and any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with the
      Interbolsa Notes, clause 7 of the Trust Deed (insofar as it relates to Subordinated Notes), the
      Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa
      Notes Agency Agreement and the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and Condition
      2(ii) in relation to the Bank only (whether in its capacity as issuer or guarantor) and Condition 4(ii)
      are governed by, and shall be construed in accordance with, Portuguese law. In each case, the
      application of such governing law shall be without prejudice to the applicability, under the conflicts
      of rules applicable in the relevant forum, in the light of such submission, of Cayman Islands law (in
      relation to matters concerning BES Finance) or Portuguese law (in relation to matters concerning the
      Bank as an Issuer or as a guarantor, as the case may be).

(b)   Each of BES Finance and the Bank agrees, for the exclusive benefit of the Trustee, the Noteholders
      and the Couponholders that the courts of England are to have jurisdiction to settle any disputes
      which may arise out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement
      except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the Coupons (including a dispute
      relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with Trust Deed, the
      Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the
      Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the


                                                   127
      Coupons) and that accordingly any suit, action or proceedings (together referred to as
      “Proceedings”) arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement
      except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the Coupons (including any
      Proceedings relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with the Trust
      Deed, the Principal Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended
      by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the
      Coupons) may be brought in such courts.

      The Bank agrees for the exclusive benefit of the Noteholders that the courts of Portugal are to have
      jurisdiction to settle any disputes which may arise out of or in connection with the Principal Agency
      Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency
      Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes and
      that accordingly any suit action or proceedings (together referred to as “Proceedings in Respect of
      Interbolsa Notes”) arising out of or in connection with the Principal Agency Agreement, in respect
      of the Interbolsa Notes to the extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the
      Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes (including any
      Proceedings in Respect of Interbolsa Notes relating to any non-contractual obligations arising out of
      or in connection with the Principal Agency Agreement, in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the
      extent amended by the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common Representative
      Appointment Agreement and/or the Interbolsa Notes) may be brought in such courts.

      Each of BES Finance and the Bank hereby irrevocably waives any objection which it may have now
      or hereafter to the laying of the venue of any such Proceedings and Proceedings in respect of
      Interbolsa Notes (including any Proceedings and Proceedings in respect of Interbolsa Notes relating
      to any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection with the Trust Deed, the Principal
      Agency Agreement except, in respect of Interbolsa Notes to the extent amended by the Interbolsa
      Notes Agency Agreement, the bearer Notes other than Interbolsa Notes and/or the Coupons, the
      Principal Agency Agreement in respect of the Interbolsa Notes, to the extent amended by the
      Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the Common Representative Appointment Agreement and/or
      the Interbolsa Notes) in any such court and any claim that any such Proceedings have been brought
      in an inconvenient forum and further irrevocably agrees that a judgment in any such Proceedings
      brought in the English courts or in the Portuguese courts, as the case may be, shall be conclusive and
      binding upon it and may be enforced in the courts of any other jurisdiction.

      To the extent permitted by law, nothing contained in this Condition shall limit any right to take
      Proceedings against BES Finance or the Bank in any other court of competent jurisdiction, nor shall
      the taking of Proceedings in one or more jurisdictions preclude the taking of Proceedings in any
      other jurisdiction, whether concurrently or not.

      Each of the Issuers appoints the London branch of the Bank at its office in London for the time being
      (being as at 17th July, 2013 at 10 Paternoster Square, London EC4M 7AL) as its agent for service of
      process, and undertakes that, in the event of the London branch of the Bank ceasing so to act, it will
      appoint another person as its agent for service of process in England in respect of any Proceedings.

      Nothing herein shall affect the right to serve proceedings in any other manner permitted by law.

22.   Common Representative

      In the case of Interbolsa Notes, the holders of the Notes shall at all times be entitled to appoint and
      dismiss a Common Representative by means of a resolution and pursuant to the Common
      Representative Appointment Agreement. Upon the appointment of a new Common Representative
      by the holders of the Notes pursuant to this Condition, any previously appointed and dismissed


                                                   128
Common Representative will immediately cease its engagement and will be under the obligation
immediately to transfer to the new Common Representative appointed by the holders of the Notes all
documents and information then held by such Common Representative pertaining to the Notes.




                                           129
                                            USE OF PROCEEDS

The net proceeds from each issue of Notes will be applied by the relevant Issuer for general financing
requirements in the relevant Issuer’s general corporate purposes, which include making a profit. If, in respect
of any particular issue, there is a particular identified use of proceeds, this will be stated in the applicable
Final Terms.




                                                      130
                                            BES FINANCE LTD.

History

BES Finance was incorporated in the Cayman Islands (with registered number 69526) on 15th November,
1996 for an unlimited duration and with limited liability as an exempted company under the laws of the
Cayman Islands.

The registered office of BES Finance is c/o Maples Corporate Services Limited, PO Box 309, Ugland House,
Grand Cayman, KY1-1104, Cayman Islands.

Directors

The Directors of BES Finance are:

Name                                        Function within the Issuer       Function within the Guarantor
Ricardo Espírito Santo Silva Salgado        Director                         Director
Ricardo Abecassis Espírito Santo Silva      Director                         Director
Amílcar Carlos Ferreira de Morais Pires     Director                         Director
Isabel Maria Carvalho de Almeida            Director                         Adviser to the Board of Directors
Jose Leal de Faria                          Director                         Director

The business address for all the above Directors is Avenida da Liberdade, 195, 1250-142 Lisbon, Portugal.
BES Finance has no employees or non-executive Directors.

BES Finance is not aware of any potential conflicts of interest between the duties to BES Finance of the
persons listed above and their private interests or other duties.

BES has an Audit Committee which is responsible for all units within the BES Group, including BES
Finance. The Audit Committee is composed of three non-executive directors qualified as independent: José
Manuel Ruivo da Pena, Luís António Burnay Pinto de Carvalho Daun e Lorena and João de Faria Rodrigues.

BES Finance complies with its country’s of incorporation corporate governance regime(s).

Business

BES Finance is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (“BES”). BES Finance has no
subsidiaries. The objects for which BES Finance was established are unrestricted and include, pursuant to
clause 3 of its Memorandum of Association, without limitation, “to carry on the business of a finance and
investment company”, “to receive monies on deposit or loan and to borrow or raise money in any currency
with or without security”, “to advance, deposit or lend money, securities and/or property”, “to buy, sell,
broke and deal in foreign exchange, bullion, specie, precious metal and minerals, and all other commodities”,
“to enter into currency and/or interest rate and any other type of swap agreements”, “to act as promoters and
entrepreneurs”, “to exercise and enforce all rights and powers conferred by or incidental to the ownership of
any shares, stock, obligations or other securities”, “to purchase or otherwise acquire, to sell, exchange,
surrender, lease, mortgage, charge, convert, turn to account, dispose of and deal with real and personal
property and rights of all kinds”, “to stand surety for or to guarantee, support or secure the performance of all
or any of the obligations of any person, firm or company whether or not related or affiliated to the company
in any manner”, “to engage in or carry on any other lawful trade, business or enterprise”.




                                                      131
Capitalisation and Indebtedness

The existing issued ordinary shares of BES Finance are not listed on the Official List of the Luxembourg
Stock Exchange or on any other stock exchange and are not dealt on any other recognised market.

Two Ordinary Shares were issued and fully paid when BES Finance was incorporated on 15th November,
1996. A further 24,998 Ordinary Shares were issued on 21st January, 1997. The share capital of BES
Finance was subsequently redenominated in Euro and its authorised share capital increased by various
special resolutions to its current level of €600,100,000 consisting of 100,000 Ordinary Shares of par value
€1.00 each and 600,000 Non-cumulative Guaranteed Step-Up Preference Shares Series A of a par value of
€1,000 each. Up to 31st December, 2012, 403,003 Non-cumulative Guaranteed Step-Up Preference Shares
Series A have been repurchased.

All issued Ordinary Shares are credited as fully paid and are held by BES as at the date of this Prospectus.
Through its shareholding BES directly controls BES Finance. There are no other measures in place
concerning such control.

No capital of BES Finance is under option or is agreed conditionally or unconditionally to be put under
option.

The following table sets forth, at 31st December, 2012 the capitalisation of BES Finance. This table should
be read in conjunction with the financial statements and notes thereto of BES Finance which are incorporated
by reference into this Prospectus. Save as disclosed below there has been no material change in the
capitalisation of BES Finance since 31st December, 2012.

                                                                                                     (Expressed in thousand EUR)
                                                                                  31st December, 2012               31st December, 2011
Shareholder’s Equity
100,000 shares of EUR 1 par value each, fully authorised,
subscribed and paid up                                                                                    100                               100
Outstanding pref shares of EUR 1.00 par value each, fully
authorised, subscribed and paid up                                                                  196,997                           215,621
Retained earnings – prior                                                                         (124,259)                            42,469
Reserves and other gains/ (losses) in equity instruments                                            153,399                           146,143
Dividends distributed                                                                              (10,996)                          (25,657)
Net Income                                                                                           10,045                         (141,063)
Total Shareholder’s Equity                                                                          225,286                            237,613

Short term debt(1) (par value)                                                                      502,663                           134,750
Long term debt(1) (par value)                                                                     2,891,415                         6,558,268
Long term borrowings(1) (par value)                                                               2,891,415                         6,558,268
  Subordinated debt(1) (par value)                                                                   62,782                           146,610
  Corporate debt(1) (par value)                                                                   2,828,633                         6,411,658
Total short and Long term debt                                                                    3,394,078                         6,693,018

Notes:
(1)      Short and Long term debt are included in the Issuer’s financial statements, prepared in accordance with International Financial Reporting
         Standards, at amortized cost except for certain notes containing embedded derivatives which are at estimated market value or fair value
         hedge adjustments. These specific captions per the financial statements amount to EUR 551,351,857 and EUR 50,983,534, respectively.
         Subsequent Events:
         - Since 31st December, 2012, the Company repurchased an additional EUR 5,000,000 preference shares, having booked a gain in Reserves
         and other gains/ (losses) in equity instruments (EUR 1,232,690).




                                                                     132
        - A dividend in the amount of EUR 12,031,652 (EUR 10,713,433 net of repurchased preference shares) was declared and was to be paid,
        regarding the outstanding preference shares (EUR 55.80 per share), in July 2013.


Financial Information of BES Finance

The following tables present the balance sheet and statement of income of BES Finance for the years ended
31st December, 2012 and 2011 and the statement of cash flows of BES Finance for the periods ended 31st
December, 2012 and 2011. The information for the years ended 31st December, 2012 and 2011 has been
extracted without material adjustment from, and should be read in conjunction with, the audited financial
statements of BES Finance for the years ended 31st December, 2012 and 2011, together with the notes
thereto, all of which are incorporated by reference into this Prospectus.

                                                                                                                  (expressed in euro)
                                                                                   31st December, 2012         31st December, 2011
Assets
Deposits with banks                                                                            2,643,472                 3,505,600
Financial assets held for trading                                                             95,157,457                76,265,593
Loans and advances to banks                                                                3,090,601,806             4,828,383,519
Derivatives for risk management purposes                                                       3,722,505                13,279,027
Total assets                                                                               3,192,125,240             4,921,433,739

Liabilities
Financial liabilities held for trading                                                        95,579,268                55,256,659
Deposits from banks                                                                           79,339,728                68,436,510
Debt securities issued                                                                     2,727,995,736             4,407,083,477
Derivatives for risk management purposes                                                               -                 1,366,306
Subordinated debt                                                                             63,747,514               151,444,767
Other liabilities                                                                                177,204                   233,025
Total liabilities                                                                          2,966,839,450             4,683,820,744

Equity
Ordinary and preference shares                                                              197,097,000                 215,721,000
Other reserves and retained earnings                                                         18,143,981                 162,954,802
Profit for the year                                                                          10,044,809                (141,062,087)
Total equity                                                                                225,285,790                 237,612,995
Total liabilities and equity                                                               3,192,125,240             4,921,433,739

BES Finance Ltd.

Income statement

                                                                                                                  (expressed in euro)
                                                                                   31st December, 2012         31st December, 2011
Interest and similar income                                                              248,852,398                 324,429,651
Interest expense and similar charges                                                     235,974,139                 305,141,476
Net interest income                                                                          12,878,259                  19,288,175
Fee and commission expense                                                                      (37,734)                      (62,659)
Net gains/(losses) from financial assets


                                                                     133
                                                                                    (expressed in euro)
                                                             31st December, 2012   31st December, 2011
and liabilities at fair value through profit or loss                (4,004,426)            (6,711,799)
Net (losses)/gains from foreign exchange differences                   (28,651)           (15,840,150)
Other operating income and expense                                   1,271,363           (137,717,463)
Operating income                                                   10,078,811           (141,043,896)
General and administrative expenses                                    34,002                 18,911
Operating expenses                                                     34,002                 18,911
Profit for the year                                                10,044,809           (141,062,807)

BES Finance Ltd.

Statement of cash flows

                                                                                    (expressed in euro)
                                                             31st December, 2012   31st December, 2011
Cash flows arising from operating activities
Interest received                                                 344,765,119            369,395,722
Interest paid                                                    (296,353,526)          (358,951,565)
Taxes and licences                                                     (1,397)               (34,271)
Foreign currency exchange gains / (losses)                            (28,651)           (15,840,150)
Other operating income and expenses                                 1,051,744           (138,628,556)
                                                                   49,433,289           (144,058,820)

Changes in operating assets and liabilities
Loans and advances to banks                                      1,733,461,376         3,488,827,761
Short and long term debt                                        (1,694,884,594)       (1,774,849,317)
Subordinated debt                                                  (83,824,618)       (1,273,325,282)
Financial assets and liabilities held for trading                   16,152,407           (27,451,172)
Derivatives for risk management purposes                             1,172,026              (558,734)
Net cash flows from operating activities                           21,059,886            268,584,436

Cash flows arising from financing activities
Repurchase preference shares                                      (11,375,675)          (240,332,527)
Dividends distributed                                             (10,996,339)           (25,656,952)
Net cash flows from financing activities                          (22,372,014)          (265,989,479)

Net increase/ (decrease) in cash and cash
equivalents                                                          (862,128)             2,594,957
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year                      3,505,600                910,643
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year                            2,643,472              3,505,600

Selected Financial Information of BES Finance

The following table presents selected financial information of BES Finance for the years ended 31st
December, 2012 and 2011.




                                                       134
BES Finance Ltd.

                                     31st December, 2012   31st December, 2011
Total Assets                               3,192,125,240         4,921,433,739
Total Liabilities                          2,966,839,450         4,683,820,744
Total Equity                                 225,285,790           237,612,995
Total Liabilities and Equity               3,192,125,240         4,921,433,739




                               135
                          BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, S.A. AND BES GROUP

Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (“BES” or the “Bank”) is a bank incorporated in Portugal (with commercial
registry and tax payer number 500 852 367) on 26th September, 1990, for an unlimited duration, and with
limited liability (societies anonym), under the provisions of Decree-Law no. 262/86, of 2nd September, 1986,
as amended. As of 31st December, 2012, the share capital of BES was EUR 5,040,124,063.26, represented
by 4,017,928,471 ordinary registered book-entry shares with no par value. BES’ activities are mainly
governed by Decree-Law 298/92, of 31st December, 1992, as amended.

BES and its consolidated subsidiaries (together, the “BES Group” or the “Group”) offer a full range of
banking and financial services, including deposit taking, lending, asset management, leasing and factoring,
investment banking and brokerage services. As at 31st December, 2012, the BES Group operated 666
branches in Portugal (including 43 on-site branches resulting from partnerships with insurance agents under
the Assurfinance programme) and 109 branches abroad (of which there were 26 in Spain, 41 in Angola, 33 in
Libya and 2 in Cape Verde), 28 private banking centres (23 in Portugal, 4 in Spain and 1 in Angola) and 34
corporate centres (25 in Portugal, 7 in Spain and 2 in Angola). On a consolidated basis, the BES Group
employed 9,944 people as of 31st December, 2012 (which represents an increase from 9,863 employees as of
31st December, 2011).

1.      History

        BES’ origins date from 1869, when José Maria do Espírito Santo e Silva, along with other investors,
        founded its predecessor bank in Lisbon. After the Second World War, BES became one of Portugal’s
        largest commercial banks under the direction and leadership of the Espírito Santo family. In 1975,
        virtually all institutions in the banking and insurance industries, including BES, were nationalised by
        the Portuguese government. The Espírito Santo family, deprived of its Portuguese base, began
        operations outside of Portugal, primarily in the financial services market.

        In 1986, the Portuguese government embarked upon a privatisation programme, creating the
        conditions for the return of the Espírito Santo Group to Portugal. After banking activities were again
        opened to private initiative, the Espírito Santo Group, under a strategic partnership with Crédit
        Agricole S.A. (France) and supported by a core group of Portuguese shareholders, set up Banco
        Internacional de Crédito (“BIC”), thus marking the Espírito Santo Group’s return to Portugal. That
        same year, the Espírito Santo Group acquired Espírito Santo Sociedade de Investimento (the
        precursor of BES Investimento), with the participation of Union de Banques Suisses and
        Kredietbank (Luxembourg), among other financial institutions.

        In 1991, BES (formerly incorporated in Portugal as BESCL) was re-privatised and ESFG and Crédit
        Agricole acquired stakes in its share capital. As of 30th March, 2013, ESFG and its subsidiaries held
        37 per cent. of the voting rights in BES and consolidated BES in its financial statements, while
        Crédit Agricole holds a stake of 10.81 per cent of BES voting rights. The general public, including
        institutional investors, owned approximately 45 per cent. of BES’ ordinary shares as at 30th March,
        2013. BES’ ordinary shares are listed on Euronext Lisbon.

        Crédit Agricole is a shareholder of BES and is ESFG’s strategic partner in BES’ management and
        operations, particularly in connection with the development of products in the retail sector. To the
        best of BES’ knowledge, there are no written arrangements governing this relationship.

        During the 1990s, BES’ business expanded both geographically and by type of activity as a result of
        several investments. In 1992, BES purchased Banco Industrial del Mediterráneo (later Banco
        Espírito Santo (Spain)) and expanded its activity in the Spanish market, where its presence was
        reinforced in 2000, following the acquisition of Benito y Monjardín and GES Capital.


                                                     136
In line with the internationalisation of its activities, in 2000, an important strategic partnership was
established with the Bradesco Group in Brazil, leading to BES’ acquisition of 3.25 per cent. of
Banco Bradesco S.A. (“Bradesco” or “Banco Bradesco”) and Bradesco’s acquisition of 3 per cent. of
BES. In addition, both groups established joint holdings in BES Investimento do Brasil and BES
Securities in Brazil. Investments in the Americas reached the United States, where BES acquired
Espírito Santo Bank, a bank mainly focused on private banking and directed to customers in Latin
America, particularly in Brazil. In the same year, a strategic partnership was established in Portugal
with Portugal Telecom, which led to the establishment of Banco BEST – Banco Electrónico de
Serviço Total in 2001.

In August 2001, BES Angola (a financial institution based in Angola) was incorporated, and its
activities were initiated, on 24th January, 2002. In 2003, BES sold 20 per cent. of BES Angola to the
Angolan Group GeniGroup.

Within the scope of the BES Group’s international expansion policy, in 2003 BES acquired Bank
Espírito Santo International, Limited. In the same year, BES acquired 50 per cent. in Locarent, a
rent-a-car business, through a strategic partnership with Caixa Geral de Depósitos (“CGD”) and
Serfingest, SGPS.

In 2004, Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. (Spain) and Hypovereinsbank (“HVB group”) entered into an
agreement for the acquisition of the total share capital of Banco Inversión (Spain) by Banco Espírito
Santo, S.A. (Spain), a transaction that was authorised by the Bank of Spain at the beginning of 2005
and executed during that year.

In February 2005, BES increased its direct shareholding in the voting share capital of Banco
Bradesco, S.A., from 3.56 per cent. to 6.74 per cent.

In October 2005, BES Investimento together with Concordia Sp z.o.o. (“Concordia”), a company
based in Warsaw, Poland, that specialises in providing financial advisory services, established a
strategic partnership for the incorporation of Concordia Espírito Santo Investment (“CESI”), a
company that operates in the Polish market focusing on the provision of advisory services in project
finance, mergers and acquisitions and other areas of corporate finance.

In February 2006, BES’ Board of Directors decided to acquire a shareholding of 50 per cent. in
Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade-Vida and the sale of a 15 per cent. shareholding in Espírito
Santo Companhia de Seguros, S.A., both transactions concluded on 27th June, 2006. Both
companies changed their names to BES Vida, Companhia de Seguros (“BES Vida”) and BES,
Companhia de Seguros (“BES Seguros”), respectively.

In May 2007, BES announced the conclusion of a merger by incorporation of its Spanish subsidiary
(Banco Espírito Santo (Spain)) into BES, with the objective of achieving greater operating efficiency
through economies of scale and to increase activity in the Spanish corporate market.

In March 2008, BES Angola established a strategic partnership with Espírito Santo Activos
Financeiros (“ESAF”) termed “BESAACTIF”, the first fund management firm to operate in Angola.
Also in March of 2008, ESFG entered into an agreement with Portugal Telecom to acquire 34 per
cent. of the share capital of Banco BEST.

On 31st December, 2008, BES announced the conclusion of a merger by incorporation of Besleasing
e Factoring, Instituição Financeira de Crédito, S.A, into BES.

In August 2009, the Bank announced the creation of AVISTAR SGPS, S.A. (the holding company
concentrating BES’ strategic holdings, namely in Portugal Telecom, S.A., EDP, S.A. and Banco
Bradesco, S.A.) and BES Africa (the holding company for the Group’s strategic interests in Africa).

                                              137
BES Investments announced the expansion of its operations to the US by opening a branch in New
York.

In November 2009, the Bank entered into an agreement to acquire 40 per cent. of the capital of
Aman Bank for Commerce and Investment Stock Company (“Aman Bank”), a privately owned
Bank in Libya with its registered office in Tripoli. This transaction was concluded in April 2010.

In December 2009, the Bank sold 24 per cent. of the share capital of BES Angola for
U.S.$375,000,000 and entered into an agreement with Banque Extérieure d’Algérie and Swicorp Ijar
to set up a leasing company in Algeria, in which BES will have a 34 per cent. shareholding. Ijar
Leasing, Algérie was incorporated in 2011.

In July 2010, BES opened BES Cabo Verde (“BESCV”), a universal service bank incorporated
under Cape Verdean law. Also at this time, Espírito Santo Activos Financieros S.A. entered into an
agreement to fully acquire Gespastor SGIIC, S.A., a fund management firm, through Espírito Santo
Gestión, SGIIC, S.A. (“ES Gestión”).

On 6th August, 2010, the results of the stress tests carried out on BES by the Committee of European
Banking Supervisors (“CEBS”) were disclosed. These results showed that BES met the relevant
regulatory capital requirements.

In October 2010, BES África, SGPS entered into an agreement to acquire a 25.1 per cent. direct
shareholding in Moza Banco (Mozambique) and to simultaneously subscribe for shares in the share
capital of Moza Banco (Mozambique). This acquisition closed in January 2011. Also in October, the
Mexican regulator, Comisión Nacional Bancaria y de Valores, authorised BES and BES
Investimento to open a joint representation office in Mexico, the first time that Mexico has hosted a
Portuguese financial institution.

In November 2010, BES Investimento was authorised to acquire a 50.1 per cent. shareholding in
Execution Holdings Limited, an investment banking and international brokerage group headquarters
in London.

On 28th April, 2011, BES informed the market that an agreement had been reached to sell
approximately 78 million ordinary shares of Banco Bradesco SA to Cidade de Deus Companhia
Comercial de Participações which represented as of that date 4.1 per cent. of the share capital of
Banco Bradesco SA.

On 24th June, 2011, BES and China Development Bank Corporation signed a memorandum of
understanding under which both banks established co-operation principles for developing future
business. Following this, in September 2011, BES and China Development Bank Corporation signed
an agreement for a 3 year mid/long-term credit facility in the amount of U.S.$300 million.

On 25th August, 2011, BES informed the market about the disposal of 3.7 per cent. of a 5 per cent.
stake it held in Saxo Bank A/S to TPG Capital, part of the TPG Group.

On 7th November, 2011, BES and Dagong Global Credit Rating Co., Ltd (a Chinese credit rating
agency) signed an agreement for Dagong Global Credit Rating Co., Ltd to provide credit ratings to
Banco Espírito Santo and Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente.

On 5th December, 2011, BES announced the conclusion of a share capital increase from
EUR `3,499,999,998.00 to EUR 4,030,232,150.40. This share capital increase entailed the issuance
of 294,573,418 new ordinary, registered and book-entry shares, with no par value, with an issuance
price per share of EUR 1.80, and was made through contributions-in-kind comprising the securities



                                            138
     issued by BES, BES Investimento and BES Finance exchanged pursuant to exchange offers made to
     investors. This transaction generated a positive impact in a Core Tier 1 ratio.

     Developments in 2012

     On 1st March, 2012, BES announced the global results of the third and last working phase of the
     Special Inspections Programme (“SIP”), established under the Stabilisation Programme agreed
     between the EU, the IMF and the Portuguese government. The purpose of this programme was
     validating the credit risk data used in the valuation of the financial strength of BES, through an
     independent valuation of its loan portfolios, the adequacy of its risk management policies and
     procedures, as well as confirming the calculation of its capital requirements for credit risk.

     As in 2011, the SIP covered the eight largest Portuguese banking groups, including ESFG. The first
     two working phases were concluded and their results were published on 16th December, 2011. SIP’s
     third working phase was based on a prospective approach, with the objective of evaluating the
     adequacy of methodology and criteria used by banking groups in the financial projections that
     support evaluation of future solvency within the framework of stress test exercises.

     Such evaluation concluded that the BES Group used clearly adequate methodology and criteria, the
     highest evaluation granted within SIP’s phase 3.

     With regards to ratings, throughout 2012 BES’ ratings suffered the following adjustments:

            DBRS – on 31st January, 2012 there was a downgrading of BES’ senior long-term debt and
             deposit rating to “BBB (low)”, with negative trend, following the downgrade of the long-
             term rating of the Portuguese Republic from “BBB” to “BBB (low)”. BES’ short-term debt
             and deposits rating was downgraded from “R-2 (high)” to “R-2 (mid)”, with negative trend.
             On 5th December, 2012 BES’ ratings were reaffirmed and removed from review.

            Standard & Poor’s ratings agency, together with its affiliates (“S&P Ratings”) – on 14th
             February, 2012 there was a downgrading of BES’ long-term credit rating from “BB” to “BB-
             ”, with negative outlook whilst its short-term credit rating was reaffirmed at “B” by S&P.
             This followed the downgrade of the Republic of Portugal’s sovereign long-term credit
             ratings from “BBB-” to “BB” and its short-term credit rating from “A-3” to “B” with
             negative outlook, the publishing of the Banking Industry Country Risk Assessment on
             Portugal, and the revision of the credit rating of other Portuguese banks by S&P Ratings. On
             12th July, 2012 BES’ ratings were affirmed following the review of the implications of the
             capital increase concluded in May.

            Moody’s ratings agency, together with its affiliates (“Moody’s Ratings”) - on 15th February,
             2012 following the downgrade of the Republic of Portugal’s sovereign rating from “Ba2” to
             “Ba3” Moody’s Ratings announced that it had begun a downwards revision of the ratings of
             the Portuguese banks. On 28th March, 2012, Moody’s Ratings concluded its review for the
             downgrade of the Portuguese banks. The long-term rating of BES was downgraded from
             “Ba2” to “Ba3” by Moody’s, the same level as the Portuguese sovereign rating. The
             standalone bank financial strength rating was downgraded to “E+” from “D-”

2.   BES’ International Presence

     Spain

     In Spain, the BES Group has operations in corporate banking, private banking and affluent banking.
     The BES Group has also developed investment-banking activities in Spain, holding a leading
     position in the Spanish brokerage market and in mergers and acquisitions. Taking advantage of the

                                                 139
geographical proximity to Spain, the Group has an Iberian vision of the market, facilitating and
promoting exports and direct investment by Portuguese companies in Spain, and by Spanish
companies in Portugal.

Brazil

The BES Group is present in Brazil through BES Investimento do Brasil, in which Banco Bradesco
holds a 20 per cent. stake. BES Investimento do Brasil focuses its activity on the capital markets,
risk management, proprietary trading, project finance, distribution of fixed income products, private
equity and corporate finance. The BES Group’s asset management activity in Brazil is conducted by
BESAF – BES Ativos Financeiros, and its securities brokerage activity is conducted by BES
Securities.

Angola

In Angola, the BES Group conducts its activity through BES Angola (“BESA”), a bank incorporated
under Angolan law that provides a global service to individual and corporate clients. BES Angola
operates through a network of branches and sub-branches distributed in six provinces, and a private
banking centre in Luanda.

In corporate banking, BESA is supported by two corporate centres in Luanda, focusing its activity on
(i) establishing commercial partnerships of mutual added value with the large and medium-sized
companies operating in Angola, namely by financing the investment projects or cash needs of these
companies and providing technical and legal support; and (ii) supporting foreign companies and
entrepreneurs (principally from Portugal, Spain, Brazil and Germany) that are expanding their
activity into Angola. The BES Group’s investment banking business has also been expanding
through tracking business opportunities and arranging financing solutions in the areas of project and
corporate finance.

In the asset management area, BESAACTIF—Sociedade Gestora de Fundos de Investimento, the
first fund management company in Angola, manages a closed-end real estate fund (and a second one
is pending authorisation by the competent authorities), and BESAACTIF—Sociedade Gestora de
Fundos de Pensões markets an open-ended defined contribution pension fund called BESA Opções
de Reforma fund.

BESA has been asserting its position as a reference bank in the Angolan market, where it stands out
for its profitability and efficiency levels, as stated in the November 2010 KPMG report entitled
“Analysis to the Angolan Banking sectors” while being actively engaged in society and participating
in Angola’s reconstruction process within the scope of its sustainability policy.

Cape Verde

The activity of BES Cabo Verde is concentrated on the local corporate market, particularly the
public sector and affiliates of Portuguese groups with economic interests in Cape Verde, and on the
local affluent market.

The BES Cape Verde branch continues to operate, concentrating its activity on granting loans to
non-resident entities.

Libya

The BES Group operates in Libya through a 40 per cent. stake in Aman Bank, of which it has
management control. Through its presence in Libya, the BES Group not only aims to provide
support to its clients in that country but also to open access channels to the North African markets.


                                            140
Libya is in a phase of consolidation following the fall of the previous regime, and Aman Bank stands
in a good position to take advantage of growth opportunities in the country.

The Bank has suffered neither sanctions nor significant damage to its infrastructures, and so it
continues to operate during the transition period.

United Kingdom

In London, Europe’s main financial centre, BES operates through a branch which concentrates its
activity in wholesale banking, namely syndicated credit transactions, leveraged finance operations
and commodities structured trade finance and, in close co-operation with BES Investimento, in
project finance operations. At the end of 2010, BES Investimento acquired a 50.1 per cent. stake in
Execution Holding Limited an international investment banking group focusing on brokerage,
research, mergers and acquisitions, corporate finance, corporate brokerage and equity capital
markets. Through this acquisition, the BES Group fulfilled its intention to reinforce a presence in
Europe’s largest financial centre, while opening an access route to emerging markets such as China
and India.

France

BES conducts its activity in France through Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie, in which it has a
42.69 per cent. stake. The bank focuses its activity on corporate banking and the provision of
financial services to Portuguese residents in France who are clients of BES in Portugal.

United States

Through Espírito Santo Bank, based in Miami, the BES Group conducts international private
banking activities in the United States, where its main customers are the local Portuguese and Latin
American communities. BES’ New York branch focuses its activity in wholesale banking, mainly in
the United States and Brazil. BES Investimento’s New York branch distributes products in the core
geographies, primarily in the areas of project finance and other structured finance activities,
leveraging its Brazilian presence, strong positioning in the capital markets business in Iberia, and
reference clients in the area of project finance. The BES Group’s presence in New York gives it
access to institutional investors in one of the world’s main financial centres.

Macao

The BES Group is present in Macao through BES Oriente, whose main activity is to support the
business operations developed by BES’ clients in the region, while seeking to seize business
opportunities leveraged by the expressed intent of the People’s Republic of China to consider Macao
as a platform for economic co-operation with Portuguese-speaking countries.

Poland

The BES Group has been present in Poland since 2005, the year of the foundation of Concordia
Espírito Santo Investment, now known as Espírito Santo Investment Sp. Z.o.o., a BES subsidiary
that specialises in advisory services in mergers and acquisitions. In 2008, BES Investimento
expanded its activities in the country, opening a branch which provides brokerage services on the
Warsaw Stock Exchange.

Mozambique

In January 2012, the Group acquired a 25.1 per cent. stake in Moza Banco, a Mozambican bank that
opened for business in June 2008. Moza Banco focuses its activity on the corporate, private and


                                            141
     affluent banking segments. At the end of 2012 it had a network of 20 branches, the result of a recent
     expansion effort aimed at covering all the provinces in the country.

     This acquisition reinforces the Group’s presence in Africa and positions BES to take an active role in
     Mozambique’s growth, both as a partner of its local business community and by providing support to
     Portuguese companies operating in the country. The Group is therefore able to offer its clients a wide
     range of financial products, namely trade finance, financing for investment projects, cash and saving
     management services, and trade transactions in the domestic and international markets.

     Venezuela

     The Group operates in Venezuela through the Banco Espírito Santo Venezuela branch (“BES
     Venezuela”), a universal services bank that opened to the public in January 2012. BES Venezuela
     focuses on the corporate, private and affluent banking segments, mainly targeting the large
     Portuguese community in the country as well as the Venezuelan companies that do business with
     Portugal.

     The aim of the Group is to focus on the ever closer relations between Portugal and Venezuela. This
     aim is taking shape through the increasing presence of Portuguese companies in Venezuela as well
     as by the entry into various bilateral agreements.

     Luxembourg

     In January 2012, BES opened a branch in Luxembourg, an important international financial centre
     which hosts a large community of Portuguese residents. The main aim of this new unit is to serve the
     Portuguese community, but also the Group’s international clients.

     The new branch will concentrate its activity on the corporate, private and affluent banking segments,
     as well as in providing financial services to Portuguese residents in Luxembourg who are also BES
     clients in Portugal.

     Other countries

     The BES Group has representative offices in South Africa, Germany, Canada, China, Mexico and
     Switzerland, as well as partnerships with local banks, such as Banco delle Tre Venezie in Italy,
     Banque Marocaine du Commerce Extérieur in Morocco, and Banque Extérieure d’Algérie in
     Algeria.

3.   Strategy

     The BES Group’s main pillar for development and strategic differentiation lies in excellence of
     service and a permanent focus on the needs of each client, whether individual, corporate or
     institutional. With its differentiated value propositions, the BES Group offers a broad range of
     financial products and services that meet the specific needs of its clients.

     Solid and stable management has enabled the development of a consistent strategy orientated
     towards a long-term vision and based on strategic partnerships, long-standing relationships with its
     various stakeholders and a core group of reference shareholders since the Bank’s privatisation in
     1991.

     The Group’s main strategic guidelines are:

            Strengthening its domestic positioning through the acquisition of new clients (both
             individual and corporate), reinforcement of the share-of-wallet in the current client base


                                                  142
        (particularly in saving products) and the diversified offering of innovative products and
        services, supported by its cross-selling and cross-segment initiatives, such as
        “bancassurance” and “assurfinance” (in partnership with Companhia de Seguros
        Tranquilidade);

       Expansion of international activity by stronger positioning in the strategic triangle (Iberia,
        Brazil and Africa) and by expansion into new markets considered strategic and offering
        business opportunities;

       Support to Portuguese companies in the phase of international expansion through: (i)
        partnerships with local entities; (ii) trade missions with entrepreneurs to relevant countries;
        (iii) recognised know-how in trade finance, a business area in which the BES Group has
        consistently been a leader in Portugal, with a market share of 31 per cent. in 2012 (source:
        SWIFT) (2011: 28.8 per cent.); and (iv) dedicated teams and structures specialising in
        supporting companies in the process of international expansion (including the International
        Premium Unit, which has no equal in the Portuguese banking sector);

       Improvement of operating efficiency, maintaining the efficiency ratio below 50 per cent. and
        a prominent position within Iberia’s main financial institutions;

       Development of long-term strategic partnerships which are a fundamental link in the BES
        Group’s strategy. BES Group maintains an important strategic partnership with Crédit
        Agricole, one of its main shareholders under which it has established cross-selling platforms,
        namely in the area of bancassurance. BES also maintains a strategic joint venture with
        Banco Bradesco, a leading Brazilian bank and also a BES shareholder. Banco Bradesco
        holds a 20 per cent. stake in BES Investimento do Brasil, the BES Group’s investment
        banking unit in Brazil, and supports Banco Bradesco’s activity by sharing its knowledge of
        the Brazilian market – a key market in the Group’s strategy for international expansion; and

       Development of a sustainability strategy along the following dimensions: governance and
        ethics; corporate identity; innovation and entrepreneurship; financial inclusiveness;
        biodiversity and climate change; and responsible citizenship. These areas have been defined
        on the basis of shareholder consultation, the Group’s vision and activities and the trends for
        the financial sector.

Short-term strategic priorities

BES has been implementing a broad range of initiatives to tackle the financial difficulties faced by
the Portuguese economy and the challenges set by the Financial Assistance Programme. The Bank
has highlighted the following short-term strategic priorities:

       Deleveraging of balance sheet: in the second half of 2010, the BES Group initiated an
        ambitious balance sheet deleveraging programme with the objective of reducing the loan to
        deposits ratio and reinforcing its financial strength. The successful implementation of this
        programme resulted in the reduction of the loan to deposits ratio from 198 per cent. in June
        of 2010 to 137 per cent. on 31st December, 2012;

       Reinforcement of solvency ratios: in December 2011 the Group concluded debt to equity
        exchanges viewing the reinforcement of its capital ratios. These operations allowed the BES
        Group to reach a Core Tier 1 ratio of 9.2 per cent. at year-end, above the Bank of Portugal’s
        requirements for that date. In May 2012, BES carried out a capital increase that made it one
        of the best capitalised banks in Europe while maintaining its strategic autonomy. In



                                             143
             December 2012, the Core Tier 1 ratio was 10.5 per cent. standing comfortably above the 10
             per cent. required by the Bank of Portugal for the end of that year.

            Prudent risk management: in line with its traditionally prudent stance in financial
             management, BES Group increased provisioning during 2012: the reinforcement of
             provisions for credit, securities and other totalled EUR 1,199 million, while the balance of
             provisions reached 5.34 per cent. of gross loans at the end of 2012;

            Sustainability of future returns: through the growth of international business and through
             increased efficiency. Internationally, the strategic triangle (Iberia, Brazil and Africa)
             maintained an expressive contribution to the BES Group’s results, compensating for the
             deceleration of domestic activity. Net income from the Group’s operations in Africa, Brazil
             and Spain amounted to EUR 60.7 million at the end of the year, representing 69 per cent. of
             the international results. To increase efficiency, several cost reduction measures were
             implemented, especially in Portugal, where there was a net reduction of 35 branches
             between the end of 2011 and the end of 2012. Domestic costs dropped by 1.4 per cent.
             compared to the previous year.

4.   Key Strengths

     BES’ position in the banking industry is due to the following key strengths:

     A brand with more than 140 years of history

     With a history stretching back 143 years, the central goal of the BES Group’s activity is to create
     value for shareholders, while seeking to meet the needs of its clients and ensure the professional
     fulfilment of its employees. Its first and foremost mission is to align a strategy of constant sustained
     reinforcement of its competitive position in the market with absolute respect for the interests and
     well-being of its clients and employees. BES is aware of its duty to actively contribute to the
     economic, social, cultural and environmental development of Portugal and of the communities
     among which it develops its activity.

     With a presence in four continents, operations in 25 countries and employing approximately 9,900
     people as at 31st December, 2012, the BES Group is currently the largest Portuguese listed bank in
     Portugal by market capitalisation (EUR 3.6 billion as of 31st December, 2012) and the second
     largest private-sector bank by total assets (EUR 83.7 billion as of 31st December, 2012).

     BES is a unique case of organic growth in the Portuguese financial system that has steadily increased
     its average domestic market share from 8.5 per cent. when it was privatised in 1992 to 19.6 per cent.
     in 2012, benefiting from the development of a market approach based on a multispecialist model. A
     growth strategy based on solid brand recognition and strong commercial dynamics have made BES a
     reference in the domestic market, and in particular in the corporate segment with a 25 per cent.
     market share.

     BES holds a significant position in a number of products and services, namely: trade finance, PPR's
     (Retirement Saving Plans), loans, asset management, leasing, factoring, balance sheet customer
     funds (client deposits and debt securities).

     By adopting a set of measures and sustainable practices, which are a positive contribution to the
     development of BES and of the communities in which it operates, the BES Group seeks to achieve a
     balanced financial growth.

     Consistency, depth and mainstreaming of the work that has been pursued over the last 5 years have
     granted the BES Group a leading role in sustainability in the financial sector of the Portuguese

                                                   144
economy. Its external visibility in terms of social responsibility and sustainable development is
shown by BES’ position in the list of financial companies that are referenced in Dow Jones
Sustainability Indexes and FTSE4Good.

Stable core shareholder base and Management Team

The BES Group has had a strong and stable core shareholder base since 1991. BESPAR, which
holds 35.3 per cent. of BES’ share capital, is owned by Espírito Santo Financial Group (73.6 per
cent) and Crédit Agricole (26.4 per cent), which has been a partner of the ESFG since 1986. In
addition, Crédit Agricole holds a direct shareholding in BES of 10.8 per cent. Moreover, the BES
Group has strategic partnerships with Portugal Telecom and Banco Bradesco (Brazil). Banco
Bradesco, through Bradport, and Portugal Telecom Group, owned 4.83 per cent. and 2.09 per cent.,
respectively, of BES’ share capital. The free float was 47 per cent. Silchester International Investors
LLP holds a 5.8 per cent. stake in BES, following the Capital increase.

The BES Group has had a stable management team since 1991. Mr. Ricardo Salgado has been the
CEO since 1991 and Mr. Morais Pires has been the CFO since 2004. Most of the executive board
members have been directors on BES’ board for more than 10 years.

Prudent risk management

Risk management and control play a fundamental role in the balanced and sustained growth of the
BES Group. The BES Group seeks to optimise its risk/return profile across its various business lines
while maintaining a prudent risk profile in terms of solvency, provisioning, liquidity and capital
markets exposure. On-balance sheet customer funds amounted to EUR 44.8 billion as of 31st
December, 2012 (EUR 44.1 billion as of 31st December, 2011), while total customer funds
amounted to EUR 56.2 billion as of 31st December, 2012 (EUR 54.4 billion as of 31st December,
2011). In line with its prudent liquidity management policy, the BES Group actively promoted the
diversification of its funding sources as well as investing in more liquid assets, while also seeking to
increase the amount of eligible assets for rediscount with the European Central Bank (“ECB”) and
other central banks. The BES Group also actively manages its capital markets exposure, adjusting its
portfolio strategy according to market conditions.

Clear and consistent internationalisation strategy

BES is the most international of all the Portuguese private-sector banks and is present in 25 countries
in four continents. The expansion of international activities has been crucial to offset the slowdown
of domestic activity. In 2012, the international activity accounted for 29 per cent. of the consolidated
net assets of the Group. The strategic triangle (Spain, Brazil and Africa) contributed 69 per cent. of
total earnings generated by the Group’s international units with EUR 60.7 million of net earnings.

The historic connection with Africa and South America, notably with Brazil, the internationalisation
of national companies, the growing inter-dependence of economies and the large communities of
Portuguese nationals established across various continents, have provided the basis for the
international expansion of the BES Group.

The know-how acquired in the domestic market in corporate banking, investment banking and
private banking allows the BES Group to export its skills and expertise to serve local customers and
customers who do business on a transnational scale, namely by supporting the internationalisation of
Portuguese companies. In this context, the major focus has been put on facilitating access to markets
considered strategic, i.e., markets showing opportunities for business and where the BES Group has
the capacity to provide support, either through a direct presence or through partnerships with local
banks.


                                              145
     Operational efficiency

     As of 31st December, 2012, the BES Group had a cost-to-income ratio of 44.6 per cent. as compared
     to 57.9 per cent. as of 31st December, 2011. Measured against this ratio, the BES Group ranks as one
     of the most efficient banks in Portugal, according to public information provided by financial
     institutions in Portugal listed on NYSE Euronext Lisbon. This situation is the outcome of rigorous
     cost control and of the continuous implementation of rationalisation measures of human and
     operative resources, of process streamlining and continuous investment in new technologies.

     For 2012, despite the full consolidation of BES Vida, domestic operating costs decreased by 1.4 per
     cent. (a -2.5 per cent. decrease on a comparable basis), while international costs increased by 9.3 per
     cent., largely due to the expansion of the distribution network in Angola and the start of operations
     of the two new branches abroad.

5.   Business Segments

     BES Group develops its activity supported by value propositions aimed at meeting the needs of its
     clients: companies, institutions and individual clients. Its decision-making centre is located in
     Portugal, which is also its main market of operation.

     The historic connection with Africa and South America, notably with Brazil and Angola, the
     internationalisation of Portuguese companies, the growing interdependence of economies and the
     large communities of Portuguese nationals established across various continents have provided the
     basis for BES Group to expand its international structure, and to adapt it to provide relevant services
     to those communities, with a positive impact on overall activity.

     The BES Group’s products and services include deposits, loans to individual and corporate
     customers, asset management, brokerage and custodian services, investment banking services and
     the distribution of life and non-life insurance products. Additionally, the BES Group makes short,
     medium and long-term investments in the financial and currency exchange markets with the
     objective of taking advantage of price changes or having a return from its available financial
     resources.

     For financial reporting and management purposes, the Group reports on the basis of the following
     operational segments:

            Domestic Commercial Banking, which includes the Retail, Corporate, Institutional and
             Private Banking sub-segments

            International Commercial Banking

            Investment Banking

            Asset Management

            Life Insurance

            Capital Markets and Strategic Investments

            Corporate Centre

     Each segment is supported by directly dedicated structures of the BES Group, as well as by the units
     of the BES Group whose activity is most closely related to each of these segments. These structures
     run individual and autonomous monitoring of each operational unit of the Group (from an


                                                  146
investment centre perspective) while the Executive Committee defines strategies and commercial
plans for each Operating Segment.

In addition, there is a second segmentation of activity and results according to geographical criteria,
segregating the activity and the results generated from the units located in Portugal (domestic
activities) from the units located abroad (international activities).

Domestic Commercial Banking

Retail Banking (“Retail Banking” or “Retail”)

The BES Group’s approach to its retail clients is based on a diversified and distinct offer that targets
the clients’ financial needs. The creation of differentiated value propositions is supported by the
constant development of products and services, portfolio segmentation criteria adjusted to the
clients’ characteristics, high service quality and effective communication.

Over the last few years BES has developed innovative value proposals for Retail, specifically for the
segments of affluent clients (“BES 360º”), small businesses and independent professionals (“Small
Businesses”), and individual retail clients (“Mass Market”). To serve these clients, the Bank has a
network currently comprising 666 branches (representing a net reduction of 35 branches during the
year).

Assurfinance

Resulting from a strategic partnership with Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade (“Tranquilidade”),
the Assurfinance programme offers exclusive advantages to Tranquilidade clients who have no
relations with the BES Group but who open an account with BES. As a result of the intense work
developed with approximately 1,900 Tranquilidade agents, in 2012 the Assurfinance programme
contributed with approximately 20,000 new clients, thus proving one of the main initiatives of the
Retail area.

This partnership operates from 44 on-site branches where exclusive Tranquilidade agents share their
insurance mediation activity with BES clients.

BES 360º: traditional excellence in customer service

The BES 360º service is a reference proposition in financial counselling and customer monitoring for
the affluent segment. This service combines high quality standards, permanent monitoring by a
dedicated specialised account manager and an exclusive offer and solutions service adapted to these
clients’ specific requirements.

The competitiveness of the value proposition offered to the BES 360º segment is supported by a
number of strategic initiatives:

       the newly created remote approach to the affluent clients, together with the specialised BES
        360º centres, widen the scope of the value proposition to the segment, permitting a
        significant increase in the share-of-wallet as well as greater customer loyalty;

       the BES 360º commitments, which translate the goals of excellence in customer service into
        concrete objectives, ensuring a professional, strict and dedicated attitude, the efficient
        solving of problems and the proactive presentation of the best solutions for the needs of each
        client;




                                              147
       the competitive offer for the segment was further enhanced by innovative health protection
        and leisure solutions that provide a comprehensive view and response to the affluent clients’
        needs;

       innovative tools, such as the BESnet Trading platform for stockmarket trading, permit full
        coverage of the clients’ needs.

This approach and the innovative and distinctive value proposition allowed the BES 360º segment to
reach high customer satisfaction levels (90 per cent. of the clients expressed themselves to be ‘very
satisfied’), cementing its contribution to the growth of BES Group in a market context where
liquidity is particularly important. Representing more than 50 per cent. of Retail’s total customer
funds, the segment constitutes a stable basis for the Group’s funding.

Small Businesses: focus on the effective management of clients’ working capital needs

In the current context of economic slowdown, the Small Businesses segment elected as a priority of
its commercial activity to offer innovative and competitive cash management and payment and
receipt solutions which allow the clients to manage their working capital requirements more
effectively, streamlining costs and the need to resort to bank credit.

Accordingly, in 2012 the segment increased its focus on the sale of the following products:

       Cash management solutions (“BES Small Businesses Solutions”) and ‘Point of Sale
        Terminals’ (“BES Small Businesses Packs”) suiting the requirements of micro companies
        and independent professionals. As a result, the number of clients with active Point of Sale
        Terminals reached 14,000, further increasing BES’ market share in this product.

       The “BES Express Bill” solution (launched in 2009 and extended to the Small Businesses
        segment in 2010), an innovative system for payments and receipts permitting to issue
        forward payment orders guaranteed by BES. In 2012 a total of EUR 100 million in credit
        facilities were approved, to 900 clients in this segment, which during the year used this
        solution to make supplier payments amounting to EUR 39 million. In addition, 2,900 clients
        benefited from payment orders guaranteed by BES totalling EUR 93 million.

Translating the emphasis placed on counselling and the offer of solutions to support the management
of payments and receipts, assets under management in the Small Businesses segment increased to
EUR 3,030 million.

The support provided to the partners in client firms by specialist account managers, at a personal and
professional level, represents one of the more distinctive features of BES’ approach to the segment.
An integrated vision of the clients’ needs, considering the interconnected impacts between personal
and business events and taking a genuine interest on seeing them succeed over the various phases of
their life, make BES the partner of choice in the Small Businesses segment, while also furthering
BES’ ambition of achieving a high level of penetration in firms whose partners have opted for
concentrating a substantial part of their assets with BES and who resort to the bank for support in
their day-to-day management needs.

Mass Market

The intensification of economic difficulties in Portugal during 2012 led to a significant increase in
unemployment and the reduction of households disposable income. In these circumstances, BES
reinforced its offer of savings products and other everyday protection and safety products.




                                             148
The Bank thus focused on its innovative savings solutions for individual clients, such as the
“Planned Saving offer”, which fosters regular saving habits through monthly contributions starting
from EUR 10, or the “Micro Saving product”, which consists in the rounding up of payments (debit
cards, direct debits and other) to save the difference. These products had a very good response from
the Portuguese families, with the number of accounts reaching more than 235,000 in 2012.
Moreover, the launch of competitive medium and long-term savings products, such as the new
“Conta Rendimento CR” (Cristiano Ronaldo income account) or the “BES Vida Aforro” unit-linked
insurance product, supported by strong communication initiatives, decisively contributed to the
increase in total customer funds in the Mass Market segment, which rose by 9.8 per cent. compared
to the previous year. Finally the partnership entered into with the National Association of
Pharmacies, which permitted the launch of direct marketing actions targeting the holders of the
Pharmacy Card – e.g. an offer of a free cardiovascular checkup on subscription of new saving
solutions with BES – was very successful.

In the current climate of uncertainty, the Group’s insurance offer focused on the essential protection
of families from events which could jeopardise their financial stability. Hence the level of
subscriptions of the “BES Vida Segura” insurance product, which, at a reasonable cost, provide
financial security to couples with children in case of death, serious illness or absolute or definitive
disability, was very strong.

The growing use of the direct channels for contact with the Bank (“Direct Channels”) remained a
key trend in the Mass Market segment. In 2012 the internet banking service for individual clients –
BESnet – achieved a 9.4 per cent. increase in the number of frequent users compared to the previous
year, consolidating its leading position in terms of internet banking penetration in Portugal, with a
share of 43.6 per cent. of the customer base (according to Marktest), while the number of logins
reached 24.6 million (an increase of 2.8 per cent. compared to the previous year). The internet
banking service for corporate clients - BESnetwork – also reported significant growth, with the
number of frequent users reaching 57,000 at the end of 2012 (an increase of 7.8 per cent. compared
to the previous year), while the number of logins rose by 7.0 per cent., to 10.8 million. BESnetwork
was awarded the Global Finance prize for best Internet Banking for Businesses in Portugal.

The BESmobile service, launched in 2011, maintained strong growth: the number of very frequent
users increased to 40,000, and that of irregular users (those who only need it for mobility purposes)
also reached 40,000. BESmobile earned the Global Finance magazine’s award for Best Mobile
Internet Banking for Businesses in Europe. This service allows the partners or directors of subscriber
firms to use their mobile phone to validate transactions initiated through BESnetwork.

In 2012 the Direct Channels consolidated their role in the relationship with the clients, providing the
following:

       access to the entire range of services, account enquiries and transactions which can be done
        remotely, maintaining the possibility to interact directly, either through the servicing
        platform (BESnet mail) or with a BESdirecto operator, who can connect to the branch, if
        necessary;

       a strong bet on the savings and investment offer, where products can either be subscribed
        directly by the client or by phone or chat with help from a team specialising in savings,
        credit and insurance products. The stock of term deposits subscribed through BESnet grew
        by 76 per cent. in 2012, reaching EUR 412 million;

       integration of the Customer Relationship Management (“CRM”) platforms between the
        branch, BESnet and BESdirecto, managed by the marketing department with the possibility



                                             149
        of referral to the branch for commercial follow-up, and using a real time automatic decision
        model permitting to adjust the offer to the clients;

       inclusion of added value functionalities, namely the “BES Family Budget”, which
        automatically classifies expenses thus proving a valuable tool in the current economic
        context, in which savings and accurate planning are increasingly important.

The Group also operates in the Mass Market segment in the Azores, through Banco Espírito Santo
dos Açores. The deterioration of the situation in Portugal and the measures taken by the government
also impacted the Azores autonomous region, and therefore the activity of Banco Espírito Santo dos
Açores. While the number of loans being granted decreased (although the Bank continued to support
the corporate segment and in particular the small medium enterprises with good credit ratings), some
success was achieved in the monitoring and recovery of troubled loans. On the other hand, there was
an increase in customer funds. To support its strategy for the acquisition of new clients and the
increase of its market share, the Bank signed new protocols with regional companies and institutions
and emphasised the Assurfinance partnership project with Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade. In
addition, it stepped up commercial and social actions in order to further reinforce its position as a
bank dedicated to serving the clients and society and as the only bank in Azores with its headquarters
in the region.

Corporate and Institutional Customers

This business area focuses on the commercial relationship with large and medium-sized companies,
as well as with institutional and municipal clients. Given their importance in the national business
community and in the Portuguese economy in general, these clients deserve particular attention from
the BES Group, which strives to offer them solutions that add value to their businesses and supports
their initiatives.

The unit serves approximately 20,000 clients with a total financial involvement of more than EUR
30 billion in December 2012, through 25 Corporate Centres, a dedicated team of 120 corporate
bankers for medium-sized companies, and two teams of 17 corporate bankers each for Large
Companies, based in Lisbon and Porto.

Support to internationalisation

Within the support provided to the corporate sector in general, particular attention has been paid to
the exporting companies and those that are expanding abroad. One of the main concerns has been to
provide a comprehensive response to the needs of these companies. The model adopted relies on
close coordination between BES’ commercial team and the specialised services provided by the
International Premium Unit (“IPU”), a solid international presence, a wide network of correspondent
banks and the Bank’s recognised know-how and leadership in trade finance. As a result of this
integrated approach, 43 per cent. of the Portuguese exporting companies are BES Group clients and
BES’ market share in trade finance has reached 31 per cent., representing an increase of 2.2 per cent.
compared to the previous year.

The aim of the IPU is to provide specialised support services to internationalisation, effectively
backing up the clients’ export and direct investment processes. Acting as a link to the BES Group’s
international units and leveraged by the Group’s strong network of partner banks, the IPU combines
knowledge of the international markets with financial solutions know-how to meet all kinds of
requirements across the various geographies. In the satisfaction survey conducted in 2012 of clients
using the IPU services, 96.7 per cent. of the respondents said that these services were very important
for their business and 93.3 per cent. said that they would recommend them.




                                             150
Given the existing economic interconnection within the Iberian market, client acquisition and
business development are supported by close cooperation between domestic and Spanish commercial
networks. Of all the Iberian companies with a good risk profile, approximately 50 per cent. are BES
Group clients.Municipalities and Institutional Clients

Institutional Clients (municipalities, municipal companies, universities, public hospitals and third
sector institutions) have the support of expert teams based in Porto, Coimbra, Lisbon, Setúbal and
Faro. The specialisation of the Bank’s teams and the close links established with the segment permit
to develop long-term partnership activities with institutional clients.

Private Banking

Through 23 private banking centres in Portugal, ES Private Banking monitors high net-worth clients,
with assets under management totalling EUR 7.6 billion at the end of 2012.

In light of the economic and financial situation in Portugal, in 2012 the main objective of the private
banking area was to consolidate the systematic regular monitoring of BES’ affluent clients, namely
with the support of investment experts, thus permitting an asset allocation adjusted to the risk profile
of each client and incorporating the financial crisis scenario. The CRM system helped promote this
regular monitoring and joint commercial approach by investment experts and private bankers to
private banking clients.

Being part of a multi-specialist group gives the private banking area the advantage of offering its
clients a wide range of global solutions in areas such as direct investment in financial assets,
investment banking services or financial advisory services. Access to the Group’s expert teams in
these areas allows for a close and global monitoring of the clients’ needs. With this aim in mind, in
2012 the Group created a specialised financial advisory service targeting small and medium-sized
businesses which provides proactive support to the clients.

International Commercial Banking

The BES Group’s International Commercial Banking activity is developed in markets with cultural
and economic affinities with Portugal, and its expansion is essentially orientated to the South
Atlantic Axis, namely to Africa (Angola and the Maghreb countries) and Latin America (Brazil).
The Group’s international presence is mainly focused on specific areas where it holds competitive
advantages, exploiting markets and/or business areas with high growth potential, taking advantage of
the experience obtained, and in some areas the leading position, in the domestic market. Given the
increasing globalisation and openness of the financial markets, the BES Group’s international
expansion also reflects the need to obtain the economies of scale and operating efficiency gains
afforded by a wider scope of operations. The Group’s strategy is to serve local customers in target
segments but also customers doing business on a transnational scale.

Investment Banking

The BES Group’s investment banking activity is developed by Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento
(“BES Investimento” or “BESI”, which has the international trade name of Espirito Santo
Investment Bank), whose main objective is to provide services to medium-sized and large
companies, institutional clients, and in some specific segments, retail clients, in coordination with
the Group’s private banking area.

BES Investimento offers a wide range of specialised products and services, including advisory
services in mergers and acquisitions, access to transactions in capital markets (equities and debt),
brokerage and portfolio management services, structured finance, including project finance and
acquisition finance, and management of private equity funds.

                                              151
     Asset Management

     This segment includes all the asset management activities of the Group, essentially carried out
     through the specialised companies of ESAF within Portugal and abroad (Spain, Luxembourg,
     Angola, and Brazil). ESAF’s product range covers mutual funds, real estate funds and pension funds,
     besides providing discretionary and portfolio management services.

     At the end of 2012 the global volume of assets under management was approximately EUR 15.4
     billion.

     Capital Markets and Strategic Investments

     This operating segment includes the financial management of the Group, namely investments in
     capital markets instruments (equity and debt), whether they are integrated in trading, fair value,
     available for sale or held to maturity financial assets portfolios. Also included in this segment is the
     Group’s investment in non-controlling strategic positions, as well as all the activity inherent to
     interest rate and exchange rate risk management, and long and short positions on financial
     instruments management, which allow the Group to take advantage of the price changes in those
     markets on which instruments are exchanged.

     Corporate Centre

     This area does not correspond to an operating segment, but refers to an aggregation of corporate
     structures acting throughout the entire Group, such as, areas related to the Board of Directors (the
     “Board”), compliance, planning, financial and accounting procedures, risk management, investor
     relations, internal audit, organisation and quality.

6.   BES Group Structure

     As well as being an operating entity in its own right, BES is the holding company of the BES Group
     and has investments in subsidiary and associated companies. The following tables provide
     information on the organisational structure of the BES Group as at 31st December, 2012:


                                                                                             % economic
                                                                  Activity                    interest
     BANCO ESPÍRITO SANTO, SA (BES)                           Commercial banking
       Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, SA
       (BESI)                                                   Investment bank                100.00%
       BES-Vida, Companhia de Seguros, SA (BES
       VIDA)                                                        Insurance                  100.00%
       Aman Bank for Commerce and Investment
       Stock Company                                          Commercial banking               40.00%a)
       Avistar, SGPS, SA                                       Holding company                 100.00%
       Espírito Santo Servicios, SA                                Insurance                   100.00%
       Espírito Santo Activos Financieros, SA                  Asset management                 95.00%
       Espírito Santo Vanguarda, SL                            Services provider               100.00%
       Banco Espírito Santo dos Açores, SA (BAC)              Commercial banking                57.53%
       BEST - Banco Electrónico de Serviço Total,
       SA (BEST)                                                Internet banking                66.00%
       BES África, SGPS, SA                                    Holding company                 100.00%
       Banco Espírito Santo Angola, SA (BESA)                 Commercial banking                51.94%
       BESAACTIF - Sociedade Gestora de                       Asset management -                63.70%


                                                   152
                                                                               % economic
                                                       Activity                 interest
Fundos de Investimento, SA                         Investment funds
BESAACTIF Pensões - Sociedade Gestora         Asset management - Pension
de Fundos de Pensões, SA                                 funds                   63.70%
Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, SA
(BESOR)                                           Commercial banking             99,75%
Espírito Santo Bank (ESBANK)                      Commercial banking             99.99%
BES Beteiligungs, GmbH (BES GMBH)                  Holding company              100.00%
BIC International Bank Ltd. (BIBL)                Commercial banking            100.00%
Parsuni - Sociedade Unipessoal, SGPS               Holding company              100.00%
Praça do Marquês - Serviços Auxiliares, SA
(PÇMARQUÊS)                                           Real estate               100.00%
Espírito Santo, plc. (ESPLC)                   Non-bank finance company          99,99%
ESAF - Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros,
S.G.P.S., SA (ESAF)                                 Holding company              89.99%
ES Tech Ventures, S.G.P.S., SA (ESTV)               Holding company             100.00%
Banco Espirito Santo North American
Capital Limited Liability Co. (BESNAC)              Financing vehicle           100.00%
BES Finance, Ltd. (BESFINANCE)                Issue of preference shares and
                                                      other securities          100.00%
ES, Recuperação de Crédito, ACE (ESREC)             Services provider            99.15%
ES Concessões, SGPS, SA (ES
CONCESSÕES)                                         Holding company              71.66%
Espírito Santo - Informática, ACE (ESINF)           Services provider            82.28%
Espírito Santo Prestação de Serviços, ACE 2
(ES ACE2)                                           Services provider            88.26%
ESGEST - Esp. Santo Gestão Instalações,
Aprov. e Com., SA (ESGEST)                          Services provider           100.00%
Espírito Santo e Comercial de Lisboa, Inc.
(ESCLINC)                                         Representation office         100.00%
Espírito Santo Representações, Ltda.
(ESREP)                                           Representation office          99,99%
Quinta dos Cónegos - Sociedade Imobiliária,
SA (CÓNEGOS)                                          Real estate                81.00%
Fundo de Capital de Risco - ES Ventures II        Venture capital fund           60.09%
Fundo de Capital de Risco - ES Ventures III       Venture capital fund           61.54%
Fundo de Capital de Risco - BES PME
Capital Growth                                    Venture capital fund          100.00%
Fundo FCR PME / BES                               Venture capital fund           55.07%
Fundo Gestão Património Imobiliário -
FUNGEPI - BES                                       Real estate fund             81.09%
Fundo de Gestão de Património Imobiliário -
FUNGEPI - BES II                                    Real estate fund             85.78%
FUNGERE - Fundo de Gestão de
Património Imobiliário                              Real estate fund             97.24%
ImoInvestimento – Fundo Especial de
Investimento Imobiliário Fechado                    Real estate fund            100.00%
BESA Valorização – Fundo de Investimento
Imobiliário Fechado                                 Real estate fund             51.94%
FLITPTREL VIII, SA                                 Ventures tourism
                                                     developments               10.00%a)c)
OBLOG Consulting, SA                             Software development            66.63%


                                       153
                                                                                                                 % economic
                                                                                     Activity                     interest
     BES, Companhia de Seguros, SA (BES
     SEGUROS)                                                                       Insurance                        25.00%
     Société Civile Immobilière du 45 Avenue
     Georges Mandel (SCI GM)                                                        Real estate                      22.50%
     ESEGUR - Espírito Santo Segurança, SA
     (ESEGUR)                                                                        Security                        44.00%
     Locarent - Companhia Portuguesa de
     Aluguer de Viaturas, SA (LOCARENT)                                         Renting                              50.00%
     Banco Delle Tre Venezie, Spa                                           Commercial banking                       20.00%
     Nanium, SA                                                                 Industry                             41.06%
     Ascendi Douro - Estradas do Douro Interior,
     SA                                                                    Motorway concession                      18.57%b)
     Ascendi Pinhal Interior - Estradas do Pinhal
     Interior, SA                                                          Motorway concession                      18.57%b)
     UNICRE - Instituição Financeira de Crédito,
     SA                                                                Non-bank finance company                     17.50%b)
     Ijar Leasing Argélie                                                      Leasing                               35.00%
a)       These companies were fully consolidated, as the Group exercises control over their activities.
b)       The percentage in the table above represents the Group’s economic interest. These companies were accounted for following the
         equity method, as the Group exercises a significant influence over them.
c)       Entity created for the disposal of assets operation occurred during the year (see Note 53)



                                                                                                                 % economic
                                                                                     Activity                     interest
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, SA
(BESI)                                                                        Investment bank                       100.00%
 Espírito Santo Capital - Sociedade de Capital
 de Risco, SA (ESCAPITAL)                                                      Venture capital                      100.00%
  SES Iberia                                                                 Asset management                       50.00%
  HLC - Centrais de Cogeração, SA                                            Services provider                      24.50%
  Coporgest, SA                                                              Services provider                      25.00%
  Synergy Industry and Technology, SA                                        Holding company                        26.00%
  Salgar Investments                                                         Services provider                      45.05%
  2BCapital Luxembourg S.C.A SICAR                                            Investment fund                       42.12%
 ESSI Comunicações SGPS, SA                                                  Holding company                        100.00%
  ESSI SGPS, SA                                                              Holding company                        100.00%
    Espírito Santo Investment Sp, Z.o.o.                                     Services provider                      100.00%
    Espírito Santo Securities India                                           Brokerage house                       75.00%
    Espírito Santo Investment Holding,
    Limited                                                                Holding company                           68.40%
      Execution Holding, Limited                                           Holding company                           68.40%
    MCO2 – Sociedade Gestora de Fundos de                                 Asset management -
    Investimento Mobiliário, SA                                            investment funds                         25.00%
 Espírito Santo Investments PLC                                        Non-bank finance company                     100.00%
 ESSI Investimentos SGPS, SA                                               Holding company                          100.00%
  Polish Hotel Capital SP                                                  Services provider                        33.00%
 Espirito Santo Investimentos, SA                                          Holding company                          100.00%
    BES Investimento do Brasil, SA                                         Investment Bank                          80.00%
      2BCapital, SA                                                        Holding company                          45.00%


                                                            154
                                                                            % economic
                                                         Activity            interest
      BES Securities do Brasil, SA                   Brokerage house         80.00%
        Gespar Participações, Ltda.                 Holding company          80.00%
      BES Activos Financeiros, Ltda                 Asset management         85.00%
      Espírito Santo Serviços Financeiros
      DTVM, SA                                      Asset management          79.32%
      FI Multimercado Treasury                        Investment fund         80.00%
      R Invest, Ltda                                 Services provider        80.00%
      R Consult Participações, Ltda                  Services provider        80.00%
 BRB Internacional, SA                                 Entertainment          24.93%
 Prosport - Com. Desportivas, SA                   Sporting goods trading     25.00%
 Apolo Films, SL                                       Entertainment          25,15%
 Cominvest- SGII, SA                                     Real Estate         49.00%a)
 Fundo Espírito Santo IBERIA I                      Venture capital fund      38.67%
 Fundo FIM BES Moderado                               Investment fund         55.96%
 Fundo BES Absolute Return                            Investment fund        43.62%a)
BES Beteiligungs, GmbH (BES GMBH)                   Holding company          100.00%
 Bank Espírito Santo International, Ltd.
 (BESIL)                                           Commercial banking        100.00%
BES África, SGPS, SA (BES ÁFRICA)                   Holding company          100.00%
 Banco Espírito Santo Cabo Verde, SA               Commercial banking         99.99%
 Moza Banco, SA                                    Commercial banking         25.10%
ESAF - Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros,
S.G.P.S., SA (ESAF)                                 Holding company          89.99%
 Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento              Asset management -
 Mobiliário, SA                                      investment funds         89.99%
 Espírito Santo International Management, SA        Asset management -
                                                     investment funds         89.81%
 Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento              Asset management -
 Imobiliário, SA                                     investment funds         89.99%
 Espírito Santo Fundo de Pensões, SA                Asset management -
                                                     investment funds         89.99%
 Capital Mais - Assessoria Financeira, SA           Asset management -
                                                     investment funds         89.99%
 Espirito Santo International Asset                 Asset management -
 Management, Ltd.                                    investment funds         44.10%
 Espírito Santo Gestão de Patrimónios, SA           Asset management -
                                                     investment funds         89.99%
 ESAF - Espírito Santo Participações                Asset management -
 Internacionais, SGPS, SA                            investment funds         89.99%
 ESAF - International Distributors Associates,      Asset management -
 Ltd                                                 investment funds         89.99%
ES Tech Ventures, S.G.P.S., SA (ESTV)               Holding company          100.00%
 ES Ventures - Sociedade de Capital de Risco,
 SA                                                Venture capital fund      100.00%
 Yunit Serviços, SA                               Management of internet
                                                         portals              33,33%
 FCR Espírito Santo Ventures Inovação e
 Internacionalização                                Venture capital fund      50.00%
 Fundo Bem Comum, FCR                               Venture capital fund      20.00%
 Espírito Santo Contact Center, Gestão de Call    Call centers management
 Centers, SA (ESCC)                                       company             41.67%


                                            155
                                                                                                            % economic
                                                                                      Activity               interest
     Banque Espirito Santo et de la Vénétie, SA
     (ES Vénétie)                                                            Commercial banking               42.69%
a)         These companies were fully consolidated, as the Group exercises control over their activities.


                                                                                                            % economic
                                                                                 Activity                    interest
Fundo de Capital de Risco - ES Ventures II                                Venture capital fund               60.09%
  Atlantic Ventures Corporation                                             Holding company                   60.09%
  Sousacamp, SGPS, SA                                                       Holding company                   23.50%
  Global Active - SGPS, SA                                                  Holding company                   26.84%
  Outsystems, SA                                                               IT Services                   17.60%b)
  Coreworks - Proj. Circuito Sist. Elect., SA                                  IT Services                   19.45%b)
  Multiwave Photonics, SA                                                      IT Services                   12.47%b)
  Bio-Genesis                                                               Holding company                  17.98%b)
 YDreams - Informática, SA                                                     IT Services                    28.84%
Fundo de Capital de Risco - ES Ventures III                               Venture capital fund               61.54%
 Nutrigreen, SA                                                             Services provider                12.31%b)
 Advance Ciclone Systems, SA                                           Treatment and elimination of
                                                                                 residues                    19.69%b)
 Watson Brown, HSM, Ltd                                                     Recycling rubber                  22.09%
 Domática, Electrónica e Informática, SA                                       IT Services                   14.51%b)
Fundo FCR PME / BES                                                       Venture capital fund               55.07%
 Mobile World - Comunicações. SA                                           Telecommunications                 26.98%
 MMCI - Multimédia, SA                                                      Holding company                   26.98%
 TLCI 2 - Soluções Integradas de
 Telecomunicações, SA                                                       Telecommunications                26.98%
 Enkrott SA                                                               Management and water
                                                                                 treatment                   16.52%b)
 Palexpo - Imagem Empresarial, SA                                        Furniture manufacturing              27.26%
 Rodi - Sinks & Ideas, SA                                                      Metal industry                 24.81%
Espírito Santo Activos Financieros, SA                                      Asset management                 95.00%
 Espírito Santo Gestión, SA, SGIIC                                           Asset management                 95.00%
 Espírito Santo Pensiones, S.G.F.P., SA                                 Asset management - pension
                                                                                   funds                     95.00%
Espírito Santo Bank (ESBANK)                                              Commercial banking                 99.99%
 ES Financial Services, Inc.                                                  Brokerage house                99.99%
 Tagide Properties, Inc.                                                         Real estate                 99.99%
 Espírito Santo Representaciones                                           Representation office             99.99%
 ES Investment Advisors, Inc.                                              Investment consulting             99.99%
BES-Vida, Companhia de Seguros, SA (BES
VIDA)                                                                              Insurance                 100.00%
 Caravela Defensive Fund                                                        Investment fund               99.19%
 Caravela Balanced Fund                                                         Investment fund               54.95%
 ES Plano Dinâmico                                                              Investment fund               98.15%
 ES Rendimento Dinâmico                                                         Investment fund               68.92%
 ES Arrendamento                                                                Investment fund              100.00%
 ES Eurobond                                                                    Investment fund               52.77%
 Orey Reabilitação Urbana                                                       Investment fund               77.32%
 Fimes Oriente                                                                  Investment fund              100.00%
ES Concessões, SGPS, SA (ES
CONCESSÕES)                                                                   Holding company                71.66%

                                                              156
                                                                                                                       % economic
                                                                                   Activity                             interest
          ES Concessions International Holding, BV                             Holding company                           71.66%
           Empark - Aparcamientos y Servicios, SA                           Management of parking lots                  15.92%b)
          ES Concessions Latam, BV                                             Holding company                           71.66%
           Concesionaria Autopista Perote-Xalapa, CV                          Motorway concession                       14.33%b)
          Ascendi Group SGPS, SA                                               Holding company                           28.66%
          Auvisa - Autovia de los Viñedos, SA                                 Motorway concession                        35.83%
     a)        These companies were fully consolidated, as the Group exercises control over their activities.
     b)        The percentage in the table above represents the Group’s economic interest. These companies were accounted for following the
               equity method, as the Group exercises a significant influence over them.


7.   Management and Statutory Auditor

     Pursuant to the Portuguese Companies Code, BES has adopted a corporate governance structure
     consisting of the Board, which includes an executive committee (the “Executive Committee”), an
     audit committee (the “Audit Committee”) and a statutory auditor (the “Statutory Auditor”), all
     members of which are elected by the general meeting of shareholders (the “General Meeting”). Since
     late 2010, the Board also includes a Corporate Governance Committee (the “Corporate Governance
     Committee”).

     The Board is responsible for managing BES and for defining its strategy and, in particular, for
     guaranteeing that BES establishes adequate policies in order to manage the various categories of risk
     incurred in its activities. In addition, the Board is responsible for establishing means for guaranteeing
     the independence of the decisions taken by the Board and ensuring that the principle of equal
     treatment of shareholders is observed.

     The day-to-day management of BES is delegated by the Board to an Executive Committee, which
     meets once a week and whenever convened by its Chairman. The Board elects the chairman and
     other members of the Executive Committee from its members. The Chairman of the Executive
     Committee has a deciding vote.

     At present, the Executive Committee consists of 10 Directors. There are no matters restricted from
     consideration by the Executive Committee, except for matters (i) for which Portuguese law requires
     full Board participation; (ii) relating to BES’ corporate strategy and policies; (iii) relating to the
     structure of the BES Group; and (iv) strategic decisions due to their amount, risk or special features.
     The Chairman of the Executive Committee submits meeting minutes and convocations to the
     Chairman of the Board as well as the Chairman of the Audit Committee.

     The Corporate Governance Committee is composed of three independent non-executive Directors
     and has advisory powers in relation to corporate governance matters and the selection and evaluation
     of directors and senior managers. The Audit Committee is responsible for (i) supervising the
     management of BES; (ii) preparing an annual report on its own supervising activities and opining on
     the report, accounts and proposals submitted by the Board; and (iii) checking the effectiveness of the
     Internal Control System and the risk management and internal audit functions.

     The Audit Committee is currently composed of three independent and non-executive members of the
     Board.

     BES is also supervised by external entities, namely by its Statutory Auditor—KPMG & Associados
     SROC, S.A. —the Bank of Portugal, the Portuguese Securities Commission and the Portuguese
     Insurance Regulator.



                                                                  157
Board of Directors

Under BES’ articles of association, the Board must be composed of a minimum of 11 and a
maximum of 31 members (each a “Director”), who may or may not be shareholders. The Annual
General Meeting of 22nd March, 2012 elected new corporate bodies for the 2012-2015 mandate,
which resulted in a Board of 26 members. The term of office for a Director is four years and re-
election is permitted without any term limits. The General Meeting appoints the chairman of the
Board (the “Chairman”), who has a deciding vote. In the Chairman’s absence or in the event that an
impediment arises, the Chairman is replaced by the chairman of the Executive Committee. The
Board may also elect one or more of its members to take the position of vice-chairman (the “Vice-
Chairman”). In the case of definitive absence or impediment of any member of the Board, a
substitute member will be co-opted and this co-optation will need to be ratified in the next General
Meeting. The mandate of the member so elected will expire at the end of the office period for which
the replaced member was elected.

BES’ Board comprises 10 executive and 16 non-executive members. The non-executive Board
members are responsible for generally overseeing the activities of the Executive Committee.

According to the Portuguese Securities Market Commission (“CMVM”) Regulation no. 1/2010,
listed companies should, in their Annual Report on Corporate Governance, distinguish the Executive
members of the Board of Directors from the non-executive directors and, among these, those that
would comply with the incompatibility rules provided for in paragraph 1 of article 414-A of the
Companies Code (with exception to that provided in subparagraph b of the same article), and the
independence criteria provided for in paragraph 5 of article 414 of the same Code, should these rules
be applicable to the members of the Board of Directors.

According to the recommendations of the CMVM, in assessing the independence of non-executive
directors the legal rules and regulations with regard to independence and incompatibilities criteria
applicable to members of other corporate bodies should be taken into account.

In this light, and applying to non-executive directors, the criteria of independence and
incompatibility set forth in the Companies Code for members of the supervisory board are also
applied to non-executive directors. Directors are independent when they are not associated with any
specific interest group in BES and when their impartiality of analysis or decision-making is unlikely
to be affected in any circumstance, particularly because they are holding or acting on behalf of
holders of a qualifying holding corresponding to 2 per cent. or more of BES’ share capital or because
they have been re-elected for more than two terms of office, either continuously or not.

In addition to checking the independence criteria set forth by the CMVM, the Board must also
ensure the independence of its Directors in light of other relevant circumstances. For this purpose,
the Board utilises questionnaires to assess non-executive directors’ independence on an annual basis.
The non-executive directors are notified of the Board’s assessment of their independence and need to
confirm the absence of any fact that might affect their independence. The Corporate Governance
Committee must evaluate the compliance with the corporate bodies’ independence requirements in
accordance with the applicable laws and regulations.

Applying the criteria mentioned above, of the 16 non-executive members of the Board, seven were
determined to be independent, which is more than 25 per cent. of the total and thereby in line with
the CMVM’s recommendations.

The following table sets out the members of the Board for the 2012-2015 four-year mandate, with an
indication of name, qualification as an independent director or not and whether or not they are on the
Executive Committee:


                                             158
Board Member                          Executive Committee   Independent

Alberto de Oliveira Pinto             No                    Yes

Ricardo Salgado                       Yes                   No

Bruno de Laage de Meux                No                    No

José Manuel Espírito Santo            Yes                   No

António Souto                         Yes                   No

Jorge Martins                         Yes                   No

Aníbal Oliveira                       No                    No

Manuel Fernando Espírito Santo        No                    No

José Maria Ricciardi                  Yes                   No

Rui Silveira                          Yes                   No

Joaquim Goes                          Yes                   No

Ricardo Espírito Santo Silva          No                    No

Amílcar Morais Pires                  Yes                   No

Nuno Godinho de Matos                 No                    Yes

João Freixa                           Yes                   No

Marc Olivier Tristan Oppenheim        No                    No

Pedro Amaral                          No                    No

Isabel de Sousa Coutinho              No                    Yes

João de Faria Rodrigues               No                    Yes

Rita Maria Lagos do Amaral Cabral     No                    Yes

Stanislas Gerald Marie George Ribes   Yes                   No

Horácio Lisboa Afonso                 No                    Yes

Pedro João Reis de Matos Silva        No                    Yes

Vincent Claude Paul Pacaud            No                    No

Milton Amilcar Silva Vargas           No                    No

Xavier Musca                          No                    No


                                       159
List of positions held in other companies by the members of the management and supervisory
corporate bodies

The following table sets out the names of all companies and partnerships in which members of the
Board have been members of the management or supervisory board (as the case may be) at any time in
the five years prior to the date of this Prospectus, including positions in consolidated direct subsidiaries and
affiliated companies as well as external positions:

Alberto Alves de Oliveira Pinto

Holds no positions in other companies

Ricardo Espírito Santo Silva Salgado

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Chairman)

BES África, S.G.P.S. S.A. (Chairman)

BES Finance, Ltd (Member)

BEST – Banco Eletrónico de Serviço Total, S.A. (Chairman)

ES Tech Ventures, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Ativos Financeiros, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo – Empresa de Prestação de Serviços 2, ACE (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Bank (Member)

Espírito Santo Ventures, Sociedade de Capital de Risco, S.A. (Chairman)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banco Bradesco S.A. (Member)

Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie, S.A. (Member)

Banque Privée Espírito Santo, S.A. (Member)

Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)

Casa dos Pórticos – Sociedade de Administração de Bens, S.A. (Chairman)

E.S. Holding Administração e Participações S.A. (Vice-Chairman)

ES Bankers (Dubai) Limited (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Control S.A. (Member)


                                                 160
Espírito Santo Financial (Portugal) - Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo International S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Resources Limited (Member)

Espírito Santo Services, S.A (Member)

Partran - Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)

Sociedade de Administração de Bens Pedra da Nau, S.A. (Chairman)

Other Positions

Associação Portuguesa de Bancos (Vice-Chairman of the Board, in representation of Banco Espirito
Santo, S.A.) Stanley Ho Foundation (Member of the General Board)

Instituto Internacional de Estudos Bancários IIEB (Member)

Bruno Bernard Marie Joseph de Laage de Meux

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

BFORBANK (Member)

CA Assurances (Censeur)

CA Cards & Payments (Member)

CA Consumer Finance (Chairman)

CA Paiement (Member)

Crédit Agricole Creditor Insurance (Member)

Crédit Agricole Leasing & Factoring (Member)

Emporiki Bank (Member)

FIA-NET Europe (Member)

Fireca (Member)

Fonds de Garantie des Dépôts (Member of the Supervisory Board)

Uni – Editions (Chairman)




                                             161
Other Positions

Crédit Agricole, S.A. (Member of the Executive Committee, Member of the General Management
Committee, Deputy Chief Executive Officer in Charge of Retail Banking France (Regional Banks
and LCL), Specialised Financial Services and Payment Systems & Services)

José Manuel Pinheiro Espírito Santo Silva

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Member)

BES África, S.G.P.S. S.A. (Member)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Ativos Financeiros, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Bank (Member)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie, S.A. (Member)

Banque Privée Espírito Santo, S.A. (Chairman)

Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

Casa da Saudade – Administração de Bens Móveis e Imóveis, S.A. (Chairman)

ES Bankers (Dubai) Limited (Member)

Espírito Santo Control S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Financial (Portugal) - Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Vice-
Chairman)

Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (Vice-Chairman)

Espírito Santo International S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Resources Limited (Member)

Espírito Santo Services, S.A. (Member)

Europ Assistance – Companhia Portuguesa de Seguros, S.A. (Member)

Ponte Alta – Consultoria e Assistência (Sociedade Unipessoal), Lda. (Member)

Ribeira do Marchante – Administração de Bens Móveis e Imóveis, S.A. (Chairman)




                                             162
António José Baptista do Souto

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

BES África, S.G.P.S. S.A. (Member)

Other Positions

Banco Espírito Santo dos Açores, S.A. (Member of the Remuneration Committee)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside BES Group

Board of Directors

Angra Moura – Sociedade de Administração de Bens, S.A. (Chairman)

Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade, S.A. (Member)

Ijar Leasing Algérie (Member)

Other Positions

ELO – Associação Portuguesa Para o Desenvolvimento Económico e a Cooperação (Vice-Chairman
of the General Board)

TF Turismo Fundos – SGFII, S.A. (appointed in representation of the Member of the Remuneration
Committee, Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.)

Jorge Alberto Carvalho Martins

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Locarent – Companhia Portuguesa de Aluguer de Viaturas, S.A. (Chairman)

Fiscal Board

Advita – Associação para o Desenvolvimento de Novas Iniciativas Para a Vida (Deputy member)

Agência de Desenvolvimento Regional de Entre-o-Douro e Tâmega (Chairman)

Instituto Empresarial do Tâmega (Chairman)

Other Positions

Futebol Clube do Porto – Futebol, S.A.D. (Member of the Advisory Board)




                                             163
Aníbal da Costa Reis de Oliveira

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

ACRO - SGPS, S.A. (Chairman)

Diliva – Sociedade de Investimentos Imobiliários, S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Financial (Portugal) - Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo International S.A. (Member)

Olinerg – SGPS, S.A. (Chairman)

Olinveste – S.G.P.S., Limitada (Member)

Oliren – SGPS, S.A. (Chairman)

Q. L. PORTUGAL – Sociedade de Agricultura e Serviços da Quinta da Lage, Lda. (Member)

Manuel Fernando Moniz Galvão Espírito Santo Silva

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Academia de Música de Santa Cecília (Non Executive Chairman)

Bensaúde Turismo, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

Higher Council of Espírito Santo Group (Member)

Espírito Santo Control S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Health Care Investments (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Industrial, S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo International S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Irmãos – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Resources (Portugal), S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Resources Limited (CEO)

Espírito Santo Services, S.A. (Member)


                                             164
Espírito Santo Tourism (Europe), S.A. (Chairman)

Euroamerican Finance Corporation, Inc. (Chairman)

Euroamerican Finance S.A. (Chairman)

Herdade da Comporta – Actividades Agro Silvícolas e Turísticas, S.A. (Chairman)

Rio Forte Investments, SA (Chairman)

RIOFORTE (Portugal), S.A. (Chairman)

Santogal – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

Sapec, S.A. (Member)

SODIM, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Board of the General Meeting

Espart – Espírito Santo Participações Financeiras, Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
(Chairman)

Sociedade Imobiliária e Turística da Quinta do Perú, S.A. (Chairman)

José Maria Espírito Santo Silva Ricciardi

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Vice-Chairman and Chairman of the Executive
Committee)

BES África, S.G.P.S. S.A. (Member)

BES Investimento do Brasil S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Investment Holdings Limited (Chairman)

Board of the General Meeting

ESAF – Espírito Santo Gestão de Patrimónios, S.A. (Vice-Chairman)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside BES Group

Board of Directors

Espírito Santo Financial Group S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo International S.A. (Member)

General and Supervisory Board

EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A. (Member)


                                             165
Fiscal Board

Sporting Clube de Portugal – Futebol, S.A.D. (Member)

Sporting Clube de Portugal (Vice-Chairman of the Fiscal and Disciplinary Board)

Board of the General Meeting

Espart – Espírito Santo Participações Financeiras, Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A.
(Vice-Chairman)

Other Positions

EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A. (Member of the Remuneration Committee)

EDP – Energias de Portugal, S.A. (Member of the Strategy Committee)

Rui Manuel Duarte Sousa da Silveira

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of the General Meeting

AVISTAR S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)

Banco Espírito Santo Cabo Verde, S.A. (Chairman)

Banco Espírito Santo dos Açores, S.A. (Chairman)

BES África, S.G.P.S. S.A (Chairman)

BEST – Banco Eletrónico de Serviço Total, S.A. (Chairman)

Capital Mais – Assessoria Financeira, S.A. (Chairman)

ES Tech Ventures, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Ativos Financeiros, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento Imobiliário, S.A. (Chairman)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Fundos de Investimento Mobiliário, S.A. (Chairman)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Fundos de Pensões, S.A. (Chairman)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Gestão de Patrimónios, S.A. (Chairman)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Participações Internacionais, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Ventures, Sociedade de Capital de Risco, S.A (Chairman)

OBLOG - Consulting, S.A. (Chairman)




                                            166
B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Cimigest – S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Sociedade de Administração de Bens Casa de Bons Ares, S.A. (Chairman)

Sociedade de Silvicultura Monte do Arneirinho, Lda. (Member)

Fiscal Board

Companhia de Seguros Tranquilidade, S.A. (Member)

Board of the General Meeting

BES - Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Chairman)

Bespar – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)

Casa dos Pórticos – Sociedade de Administração de Bens, S.A. (Secretary)

ESEGUR – Empresa de Segurança, S.A. (Vice-Chairman)

Espírito Santo Saúde – S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)

Esumédica – Prestação de Cuidados Médicos, S.A. (Chairman)

Europ Assistance – Companhia Portuguesa de Seguros, S.A. (Vice-Chairman)

Partran – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)

T-Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Chairman)

Joaquim Aníbal Brito Freixial de Goes

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

BES – Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Member)

E.S. - Recuperação de Crédito, ACE (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Informática, ACE (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Ventures, Sociedade de Capital de Risco, S.A. (Member)

OBLOG - Consulting, S.A. (Chairman)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

BES – Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Chairman)


                                             167
Glintt – Global Intelligent Technologies, S.A. (Member)

Portugal Telecom, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Fiscal Board

Centro Social e Paroquial de Nossa Senhora da Ajuda (Chairman)

Fundação Brazelton/Gomes-Pedro Para as Ciências do Bebé e da Família (Chairman)

Fundação da Universidade Católica Portuguesa (Chairman)

Ricardo Abecassis Espírito Santo Silva

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Management Body

Board of Directors

AVISTAR S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Vice-Chairman)

BES Finance Ltd (Member)

BES Investimento do Brasil S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Bank (EUA) (Vice-Chairman)

Espírito Santo Investimentos S.A. (Brazil) (Chairman)

Executive Committee

BES Investimento do Brasil S.A. (Chairman)

Espírito Santo Investimentos S.A. (Brazil) (Chairman)

Gespar Participações Ltda (Brazil) (Member)

Fiscal Board

Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, S.A. (Chairman)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Management Body

Board of Directors

2bCapital S.A. (Member)

Agriways S.A. (Brazil) (Vice-Chairman)

BHG S.A. – Brazil Hospitality Group (Brazil) (Member)


                                            168
Câmara Portuguesa de Comércio no Brasil (Vice-Chairman)

Espírito Santo Control S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo International S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Property (Brazil) S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo Resources Limited (Member)

Euroamerican Finance Corporation, Inc. (BVI) (Member)

Europ Assistance (Brazil) (Member)

Monteiro Aranha S.A. (Brazil) (Member)

Novagest Assets Management Ltd (Member)

Pojuca S.A. (Brazil) (Chairman)

Rioforte Investment Holding Brasil S.A. (Member)

Ushuaia – Gestão e Trading International Limited (Member)

Executive Committee

Associação Espírito Santo Cultura (Brazil) (Member)

Companhia Agrícola Botucatu (Chairman)

E.S. Holding Administração e Participações, S.A. (Chairman)

ES Consultoria Ltda (Brazil) (Partner - Member)

ESAP - Espírito Santo Agro-Pecuária S.A. (Uruguay) (Member)

ESCAE Consultoria, Administração e Empreendimentos, Ltda. (Brazil) (Member)

Saramagos S.A. Empreendimentos e Participações (Brazil) (Member)

Fiscal Board

Banco Bradesco S.A. (Member)

Advisory Board

Associação Brasileira de Bancos Internacionais S.A. (Member)

Amílcar Carlos Ferreira de Morais Pires

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

AVISTAR S.G.P.S., S.A. (Chairman)


                                             169
Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Member)

Banco Espírito Santo do Oriente, S.A. (Member)

Bank Espírito Santo International Limited (Chairman)

BES – Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Member)

BES África, S.G.P.S. S.A. (Member)

BES Finance Ltd (Member)

BIC – International Bank, Limited (Chairman)

ES Tech Ventures, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

ESAF – Espírito Santo Activos Financeiros, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Espírito Santo – Empresa de Prestação de Serviços 2, ACE (Member)

Espírito Santo PLC (Member)

Execution Noble & Company Limited (Non Executive Director)

Execution Noble Limited (Non Executive Director)

Execution Noble Research Limited (Non Executive Director)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Portugal Telecom, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

Nuno Maria Monteiro Godinho de Matos

Holds no positions in other companies

João Eduardo Moura da Silva Freixa

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banco Espírito Santo dos Açores, S.A. (Vice-Chairman)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

SIBS – Forward Payment Solutions, S.A. (Member, appointed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A under
the terms of Article 390 (4) of the CC)

SIBS - SGPS, S.A. (Member, appointed by Banco Espírito Santo, S.A under the terms of Article 390
(4) of the CC)


                                            170
UNICRE – Instituição Financeira de Crédito, S.A. (Member, appointed by Banco Espírito Santo,
S.A under the terms of Article 390 (4) of the CC)

Pedro Mosqueira do Amaral

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A. (Member)

Bank Espírito Santo International Limited (Member)

BES Beteiligungs GmbH (Member)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Banque Espírito Santo et de la Vénétie, S.A. (Member)

Banque Marocaine du Commerce Extérieur (Member)

Espírito Santo International S.A. (Member)

Isabel Maria Osório de Antas Mégre de Sousa Coutinho

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Associação Novo Futuro (IPSS) (Chairman of the Board of Directors)

Entrajuda – Associação para o Apoio a Instituições de Solidariedade Social (Member of the Higher
Council)

Instituto de Negociação e Vendas (Member of the Advisory Board)

João de Faria Rodrigues

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Fiscal Board

Partran – Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

Seguros LOGO, S.A. (Member)

T-Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Member)

Marc Olivier Tristan Oppenheim

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

BSF Banque Saudi Fransi (Member)


                                             171
CA Cards & Payments (Member)

CA Paiement (Member)

Cassa di Risparmio di Parma e Piacenza (Groupe Cariparma Crédit Agricole) (Member)

Crédit Agricole Bank Polska (Chairman of the Supervisory Board)

Crédit Agricole Egypt, S.A.E. (Member)

Crédit du Maroc (Member of the Supervisory Board)

Emporiki Bank (Member)

FIA-NET Europe (Member)

IUB Holding (Chairman)

Other Positions

Crédit Agricole, S.A. (Member of the Executive Committee & Head of International Retail and
Commercial Banking)

Vincent Claude Paul Pacaud

A. Corporate positions held in companies of the BES Group

Board of Directors

BES - Vida, Companhia de Seguros, S.A (Member)

ESAF - Espírito Santo Ativos Financeiros, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Member)

B. Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

BES - Companhia de Seguros, S.A. (Member and Chairman of the Executive Committee)

Bespar - Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

Rita Maria Lagos do Amaral Cabral

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Amaral Cabral & Associados – Sociedade de Advogados, R.L. (Member)

Cimigest – S.G.P.S., S.A. (Non executive Director)

Semapa, Sociedade de Investimento e Gestão, SGPS, S.A.(Non executive Director)

SODIM, S.G.P.S., S.A. (Non executive Director)



                                           172
Board of the General Meeting

Companhia Agrícola da Quinta do Duque, S.A. (Chairman)

Sociedade Agrícola do Margarido, S.A. (Chairman)

Other Positions

Associação Novo Futuro (IPSS) (Vice-Chairman of the Board)

Entrajuda – Associação para o Apoio a Instituições de Solidariedade Social (Member of the Higher
Council)

Instituto de Bioética da Universidade Católica Portuguesa (Vice-Chairman)

Stanislas Gerard Marie Georges Ribes

Holds no positions in other companies.

Horácio Lisboa Afonso

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Camacho Palma & Lisboa Afonso – Sociedade de Revisores Oficiais de Contas (Partner - Director)

Supervisory Body

Partran - Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Chairman)

Somincor - Sociedade Mineira de Neves-Corvo, S.A. (Member of the Fiscal Board)

Teixeira Duarte - Engenharia e Construções, S.A. (Deputy member of the Fiscal Board)

Pedro João Reis Matos Silva

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

P. Matos Silva, Garcia Jr., P. Caiado & Associados – Sociedade de Revisores Oficiais de Contas,
Lda. (Member Partner)

Other Positions

Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais de Contas (Member of the Higher Board)

Milton Almicar Silva Vargas

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Cielo S.A. (Member)


                                            173
Fleury S.A. (Member)

Monteiro Aranha S.A. (Member)

Portugal Telecom, S.G.P.S.,S.A. (Member)

Other Positions

CPM Braxis S/A (Observer)

Xavier Musca

Corporate positions held in companies outside the BES Group

Board of Directors

Amundi Groupe (Member)

Bespar - Sociedade Gestora de Participações Sociais, S.A. (Member)

CA Assurances (Member)

CACI (Member)

Cassa di Risparmio di Parma e Piacenza S.p.A. (Groupe Cariparma Crédit Agricole (Member)

Crédit Agricole Egypt S.A.E. (Vice-Chairman)

Crédit du Maroc (Vice-Chairman of the Supervisory Board)

Pacifica (Director and Permanent Representative of Crédit Agricole, S.A.)

Predica (Vice-Chairman)

Union de Banques Arabes et Françaises – U.B.A.F. (Vice-Chairman)

Other Positions

Crédit Agricole, S.A. (Managing Director in Charge of International Proximity Banking, Asset
Management and Insurance)

Crédit Agricole, S.A. (Member of the Executive Committee)

The business address for all the above Directors is Avenida da Liberdade, 195, 1250-195, Lisbon,
Portugal.

Statutory Auditor

The Statutory Auditor (Revisor Oficial de Contas), re-appointed by the 2012 Annual General
Meeting for a third four-year mandate (2012/2015), is KPMG & Associados SROC, S.A., which is a
member of the Portuguese Institute of Statutory Auditors (“Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais de
Contas”), with registered office at Edifício Monumental, Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11°, 1069 –
006 Lisbon, Portugal, represented by Silvia Cristina de Sá Velho Corrêa da Silva Gomes (Revisor
Oficial de Contas), who is also a member of the Portuguese Institute of Statutory Auditors.



                                            174
8.   Risk Management

     The objective of the Risk Management function is to identify, assess, monitor and report all the
     material risks to which the BES Group is subject, both internally and externally, so that such risks
     remain contained and therefore do not affect the Group’s financial situation.

     Efficient risk management and control have always played a fundamental role in the balanced and
     sustained growth of the BES Group, contributing to optimising risk/return across the various
     business lines while simultaneously providing a consistently conservative risk profile in terms of
     solvency and liquidity.



     Credit                                                 Overdue loans and provisions

             Economic recession inevitably impacted
                                                                      137%                          57%
              risk levels: the overdue loans ratio (>90
              days) increased to 3.9 per cent. (Dec.
              2011: 2.7 per cent.) and the credit at risk
              ratio reached 9.4 per cent. (Dec. 2011:
              6.6 per cent.).                                                                       9,4%
                                                                      3,9%
             Due to the increase in overdue loan
              levels, in 2012 provisions were                   Overdue Loans +90d               Credit at Risk

              reinforced by EUR 815 million (1.62 per
              cent.), which compares with EUR 601
              million (1.17 per cent.) in 2011.
                                                                                                  5,34%
             The marked increase in provisions on
              the balance sheet (an increase of 24 per
              cent. compared to the previous year)                  1,62%
              permitted the maintenance prudent
              coverage ratios:                                   Provision Charge           Provisioning Rate
                                                                                    Provisions
             The coverage of overdue loans (>90
              days) and credit at risk reached 137 per
              cent. and 57 per cent., respectively,
              while the average provisioning rate
              reached 5.3 per cent. (Dec. 2011: 4.2 per
              cent.).

             The Inspections Programme (“OIP”)
              carried out by the Bank of Portugal
              resulted in an additional provision
              charge of EUR 78 million, fully booked
              in 2012. This amount is immaterial
              compared to the Group’s total
              provisions.




                                                    175
Solvency                                           Stronger capital ratios

       Core Tier 1 of 10.5 per cent. (Bank of               10,5%
                                                                                    9,9%
        Portugal criteria) and 9.9 per cent.
        (European Banking Authority (“EBA”)
        criteria) comfortably above minimum
        requirements, achieved without resorting
        to public funds, allows BES to maintain
        its strategic independence.
                                                               BoP                  EBA
                                                                      Core Tier I
       Risk weighted assets dropped by 6 per
        cent., to EUR 61,651 million, due to the
        Group’s risk management policy and
        continued balance sheet deleveraging.

       The international capital adequacy         Risk Weighted Assets             2012
        assessment process (“ICAAP”) exercise
        carried out in 2012 with reference to      Credit Risk                      56,454
        31st December, 2011 concluded that the
        BES Group has a conservative risk          Market Risk                      1,503
        appetite ensuring high solvency levels
        associated to a minimum rating target of   Operational Risk                 3,694
        A (debt holder perspective).
                                                   Total                            61,651


Liquidity                                          Conservative liquidity risk management

       On 31st December, 2012 the BES Group
        already met the Basel III Liquidity
        Coverage Ratio established for 2015.
                                                           Dez. 12
       The Bank of Portugal liquidity gap up to
        1 year decreased from -15 per cent.                   -
                                                            1,7%
        (Dec. 2011) to -1.7 per cent. (Dec.
        2012), which compares with a gap of -         Liquidity gap
        5.4 per cent. for the Portuguese banks         up to 1 year
        (Jun. 2012).

       With the markets not yet stabilised, at
        the end of 2012 BES opened the debt
        markets for the Portuguese banks,
        obtaining medium and long term
        funding of EUR 1.6 billion up to the
        start of 2013.

Organisation

The definition of the BES Group’s risk appetite is the responsibility of the Executive Committee. Its
responsibility also includes establishing general principles of risk management and control and
guaranteeing that the Group possesses the necessary skills and resources to meet the established
objectives.


                                            176
The BES Group has several specialised committees that play a relevant role in the area of risk
management and control, in line with the decisions taken by the Executive Committee:




Risk management functions and responsibilities are defined according to the “Three Defence Lines”
system, which clearly translates the delegation of powers and communication channels formally
adopted in the Group’s policies. This segregation of functions is fundamental to align incentives and
control and manage risk.




                                            177
At operational level, the Risk Management Function is centralised at the Global Risk Department
(“GRD”). This function, which is independent from the business areas, consistently incorporates risk
and capital concepts within the BES Group’s strategy and business decisions.


                                                        Global Risk
                                                        Department


                                     Independent
                                    Validation Unit




                                          Risk and Capital                                             Startegic
                      Credit Risk                                 Market and
    Credit Risk                            Planning and                           Operational Risk   Management of
                      Monitoring                                 Liquidity Risk
                                              Control                                                    Risk



Main functions of the GRD:

        to identify, assess, control and report on the different types of risk assumed, thus managing
         the Group’s overall risk exposure, ensuring compliance with internal and regulatory rules,
         and promoting and monitoring mitigation actions;

        to implement the risk policies outlined by the Executive Committee, while harmonising
         principles, concepts and methodologies across all the Group’s units;

        to develop and monitor methodologies and models to identify and quantify the various
         categories of risk, namely internal ratings and liquidity ratios, and decision support
         methodologies such as pricing models, payment decision models and RAROC models;

        to determine, control and report regulatory capital requirements for credit, market and
         operational risks;

        to develop the ICAAP and stress tests exercises;

        to validate on a continuous basis the risk models and parameters and validate the user-testing
         levels of risk models;

        to monitor the BES Group’s internationalisation strategy, cooperating in the design of
         organisation solutions and in the monitoring and reporting of the risk exposure of the various
         international areas.

Regulatory Framework

Basel III

The Basel II rules, first presented by the Basel Banking Supervision Committee in 2010, represent a
global regulatory change for the financial system. Their purpose is to strengthen financial institutions
and prevent new financial crises in the future. Banks will have a transitory period (up to January 1st,
2019) to comply with the approved rules. The Basel III rules have established the following
regulatory framework at the end of the transitory period:




                                                  178
       minimum Core Tier 1 of 7 per cent., of which 4.5 per cent. minimum common equity and
        2.5 per cent. capital conservation buffer;

       minimum Tier 1 of 8.5 per cent., of which 6.0 per cent. minimum and 2.5 per cent. capital
        conservation buffer;

       total solvency ratio of 10.5 per cent.;

       introduction of a countercyclical buffer, ranging from 0 per cent. to 2.5 per cent. of common
        equity, under conditions to be defined by the national regulatory authorities;

       establishment of a transitory period for the absorption of deductions to capital not eligible
        under BIS III and for the new deductions to capital;

       liquidity coverage ratio (“LCR”) of 100 per cent.;

       definition of the short and long term leverage and liquidity ratio (“NSFR”) in certain
        conditions, to be defined.

The Basel Committee’s agenda also includes the following steps in the near future:

       fundamental review of the rules applicable to the trading book of financial institutions:

       fundamental review of the treatment of securitisations within the scope of the Basel
        regulations;

       review of the “major exposures” regime; and

       review of the standard approach for calculating capital requirements and capital adequacy.

At European level, the Capital Requirements Directive IV (“CRD IV”), which will transpose into
European regulation the main components of Basel III, is still in the phase of approval and there is
still uncertainty about its final wording.

The BES Group closely follows the works and development process of the future regulatory
framework so as to be able to determine and plan for the impact that the final rules may have on the
Group.

Recovery and Resolution Plans

In 2012, the Bank of Portugal approved legislation on recovery and resolution plans. This legislation
aims, firstly, at identifying measures which can be adopted to correct a situation of stress where the
financial strength of an institution is seriously damaged, and secondly, at the possibility of carrying
out an orderly resolution of an institution.

The BES Group has in place robust mechanisms to ensure the recovery of imbalances caused by
serious events that impact its solvency or liquidity.

Prevention of Credit Risk

The economic crisis currently affecting Portugal has led a growing number of households to
experience situations of financial stress. BES has sought to anticipate and respond to this reality
through an increasingly close monitoring of the performance of loan agreements with individual
clients. In 2012 the Group implemented a process viewing the centralised detection of clients in risk


                                                  179
of default, promoting proactive contact with these clients and the adoption of measures to prevent
default.

Decree-Law no. 227/2012, of 25th October, 2012, which came into force on 1st January, 2013 (the
“Decree-Law”), established the obligation of credit institutions drawing up an Action Plan for the
Risk of Default (“Plano de Ação para o Risco de Incumprimento”, or “PARI”), thus legally forcing
banks to act in this regard. More precisely, the Decree-Law requires banks to adopt procedures and
measures to monitor the execution of loan agreements and in particular that ensure the following:

       The early detection of risks of default. To this extent the Bank of Portugal has defined which
        factors it considers to be signs of degradation of the financial capacity of a bank’s client to
        comply (e.g., the existence of defaults listed in the Bank of Portugal’s central credit registry,
        return of unpaid cheques and prohibition to use cheques, fiscal debts or debts to the social
        security); and

       The fast adoption of measures aimed at preventing default.

The Decree-Law also introduced another important measure, the Extrajudicial Procedure for Settling
Default Situations (“Procedimento Extrajudicial de Regularização de Situações de
Incumprimento”or “PERSI”). This procedure requires credit institutions to evaluate the occasional
or lasting nature of default, assess the financial capacity of the client, and where possible, present
settlement proposals that are adequate to the client’s financial situation, objectives and needs. BES
has been implementing the measures required for compliance with the procedures laid down in the
PERSI.

On-site Inspections Programme (“OIP”)

An OIP on the exposure of financial institutions to the construction and real estate sectors in
Portugal and Spain, developed by the Bank of Portugal with an external auditor appointed by it, was
conducted during the second half of 2012, with reference to 30th June, 2012.

The OIP involved the eight largest national banking groups. Its purpose was to assess the adequacy
of impairment levels recorded with regard to exposure to the sectors in question, with reference to
30th June, 2012, based on conservative assessment criteria. The BES Group was subject to the
inspections programme since it is fully consolidated by Espírito Santo Financial Group.

The programme estimated that BES Group needed to increase impairments by EUR 205 million,
corresponding to approximately 1.9 per cent. of the exposures analysed.

Of these EUR 205 million, EUR 127 million resulted from the analysis of information and events
subsequent to the reference date, such as new insolvencies/bankruptcies or the revaluation of
collaterals, as shown in the left-hand side of the chart below.

The increase of impairments made by the Group with reference to 30th September, 2012 covered a
large part of the needs identified, i.e., it reduced their amount from EUR 205 million to EUR 98
million. This amount was recorded in BES’ financial records on 31st December, 2012, as shown in
the right-hand side of the chart below.




                                              180
           impairment charges (Eur mn)
                          250                      Needs ident ified in t he OIP                                Reinforcement s

                                                                      78                   205                    107
                          200


                          150
                                            127

                                                                                                                                           98
                          100


                              50


                               0
                                   Informat ions /event s    Remaining charge       Tot al addit ional   Reinforcement @Set 12 Addit ional charge up t o
                                    subsequent t o Jun12                            Reinforcement                                        Dec12


              Im pairment /                 1,2%                    0,7%                  1,9%                   1,0%                   0,9%




     The conclusion is that the impact of the results of the OIP is immaterial in light of the Group’s level
     of provisions.

9.   Liquidity Management and Funding

     The year of 2012 started with a climate of high instability in the markets leading to a significant
     widening of sovereign debt spreads in the peripheral countries. Despite the adverse context, in May
     2012 BES successfully concluded a EUR 1,010 rights issue which was almost entirely completed
     through the exercise of pre-emption rights (99.3 per cent.) – a clear proof of the confidence placed
     by the shareholders in BES. Moreover, this operation allowed BES to meet the capital ratios
     established by the Bank of Portugal (“BoP”) and the EBA while maintaining its strategic autonomy.

     The escalation of instability at the end of 2011 and beginning of 2012 led the ECB to adopt a more
     interventionist stance and take a number of measures to restore liquidity in the market:

     (i)           a new long term refinancing operation (“LTRO”), on 29th February, 2012 (the first LTRO
                   had taken place in December 2011);

     (ii)          the extension of eligibility criteria for collaterals accepted for monetary policy operations,
                   and the reduction of the reserve requirement ratio for European banks; and

     (iii)         the announcement, in September 2011, of a programme of public debt acquisitions (Outright
                   Monetary Transactions or “OMT”) from Eurozone countries having formally requested
                   assistance from the European Commission (i.e. countries undergoing an economic and
                   financial adjustment programme or an EFSF/ESM precautionary assistance programme).

     This set of events led to a significant reduction of volatility and systemic risks in the Eurozone and
     represented an important step towards the financial stabilisation of the Eurozone. As a result the
     yields of the sovereign debt of all peripheral countries fell sharply, and by the end of the year the
     Portuguese yields had already dropped to below their level in April 2011, when the country had
     requested financial assistance.




                                                                                   181
             5Y CDS vs Rating

Portugal: Evolution of CDS 5y & Moody’s / S&P rating                              BES: Evolution of CDS 5y & Moody’s / S&P rating
                Aa2 Outlook Neg.                                      S&P                      A1                                                        S&P
                    A1           A3                                   Moody’s                        A2                                                  Moody’s
                                                                                 Bps                                Baa2
Bps                                   Baa1                                                                                 Ba1
                                                                                 1.800   A-
        A+     A-                         Ba2
1.800                              BBB                   Ba3                                                       BBB           Ba2
                                                                                 1.600                              BBB-                      Ba3
1.600                                                BB                                                                                BB
                                      BBB-
                                                                                 1.400                                                      BB-
1.400
                                                                                 1.200
1.200

1.000                                                                            1.000

 800                                                                              800

 600                                                                              600

 400                                                                              400

 200                                                                              200

   0                                                                                0
    Jan-10                Jan-11                Jan-12                  Jan-13       Jan-10               Jan-11                   Jan-12                   Jan-13
               2010                   2011                     2012                           2010                  2011                          2012



             In addition, these measures gradually restored the conditions of access to the international financial
             markets for peripheral issuers, namely for Portuguese issuers such as EDP, Brisa and Portugal
             Telecom, which, after a long period of inaccessibility to the financial markets, were able to make
             public issuances of debt in September 2012.

             This overall improvement in economic sentiment also allowed BES to tap the international capital
             markets at the end of November 2012 with a EUR 750 million issue of senior unsecured debt with
             the maturity of 3 years - the first issue of debt made by any Portuguese bank since April 2010. The
             success of the transaction was evident as the order book reached EUR 2.7 billion (four times the
             amount of the offer), with the participation of 225 national and international investors.

             Also in the last quarter of the year, BES accessed the international markets again with a USD 450
             million 3-year issue of bonds exchangeable for shares of Banco Bradesco, the third such issue made
             by BES. This transaction was designed to anticipate the refinancing of the exchangeable bonds issue
             in April 2013.

             In January 2013 the Group once again tapped the markets with a EUR 500 million issue of senior
             unsecured debt with the maturity of 5 years. As was the case with the November 2012 issue, this
             latest operation was again very well received by the markets, with demand reaching ca. EUR 3
             billion (six times the amount of the offer), and more than 280 investors participating.

             Together, these transactions generated liquidity of ca. EUR 1.6 billion, representing an important
             step in regaining access to funding through the international capital markets. Moreover, the liquidity
             thus obtained allowed BES to pursue the strategy of gradual reduction of exposure to the ECB.
             During the year the balance sheet deleveraging policies pursued permitted the reimbursement of
             medium and long term wholesale funding facilities totalling EUR 3.7 billion and also to reduce the
             net exposure to the ECB by EUR 1.8 billion. With a more comfortable liquidity position, at the
             beginning of 2013 BES decided to repay in advance EUR 1.0 billion of the ECB LTRO facility.




                                                                           182
Net ECB funding evolution

     EUR bn                             8,7          -1,8

                                                            6,9


                          3,9




         -1,8

        2009              2010          2011                2012


However, even if liquidity conditions improved as from the third quarter and it was possible to return
to market funding, the first nine months of 2012 were still characterised by scarce liquidity in the
markets. The policy guidelines that permitted the overcoming of the inaccessibility to international
markets over the last two years were therefore maintained:

1.       Continued deleveraging of the balance sheet, initiated in mid-2010. This involved the sale of
         positions in the securities portfolio totalling EUR 3.2 billion during the year. On the other
         hand the loan book was reduced by EUR 2.2 billion since 2010 with the objective of
         reaching a loan to deposits ratio of 120 per cent. until the end of 2014, which will also
         permit the deleveraging of the Portuguese families and companies.

         Loan book evolution in 2012 (Gross)

                EUR bn

                                                              -0,8
                                 52,6
                   50,5                              51,2            50,4




                   2009          2010                2011            2012


2.       Growth of customer deposits, underpinning the strategic guideline of keeping this product as
         the main funding source.

         Customer deposits increased by EUR 334 million in 2012, having reversed in September the
         downward trend observed since the start of the year.

         However, deposits growth (whose rates are limited by a maximum spread) over the year was
         under pressure from greater demand for higher return saving products, such as bonds,
         investment funds and bancassurance products.

                                               183
     On the other hand, the acquisition of control of BES Vida included bancassurance products
     within BES’ offer of customer funds, which at the end of 2012 amounted to EUR 5 billion,
     representing 8 per cent. of the funding structure.

     Customer deposits evolution in 2012

        EUR bn

                                                      +0,3

                                              34,2             34,5
                            30,8
            25,4




            2009            2010              2011             2012


     Even so, and as in 2010 and 2011, customer deposits remained BES’ main funding source,
     representing 53 per cent. of the funding structure (a 17 p.p. increase since 2009).

     Together, customer deposits and bancassurance products account for 61 per cent. of the
     funding structure.

     Funding Structure Evolution

                 2%

                                                                            27%
              54 %                 4 3%               35%
                                                                            8%



                                                      55%                   53%
                                   46%
              36 %


                 10 %              11%               10 %                   12%
                                   -8%               -11%                   -8%



              2009                 2010               2011                  2012
          Liquidity Gap   Wholesale Funding    Bancassurance     Deposits    Equity



     Over the last three years the increase in customer deposits and the reduction of the loan and
     securities portfolios in part offset the reduction in wholesale funding lines, which as a
     percentage of the Bank’s overall funding structure dropped by 27 p.p., from 54 per cent. in
     2009 to 27 per cent. in 2012.

3.   Reinforcement of assets eligible for rediscount with the ECB

     During 2012 BES pursued its policy of reinforcing the portfolio of assets eligible for
     rediscount with the ECB, which increased by EUR 4.3 billion since 2011. This


                                              184
reinforcement was mainly focused in the first half of the year, based on the ECB’s extension
of eligibility criteria for collaterals accepted for monetary policy operations.

Measures taken in 2012 to reinforce eligible assets:

         Two 3-year bond issues guaranteed by the Portuguese Republic for a total of EUR
          2.5 billion.

         Preparation of credit portfolios totalling EUR 4.2 billion in accordance with the new
          eligibility criteria.

Evolution of rediscountable securities

       EUR bn                                                   22,3

                                                18,9     19,4
                               16,5
                                         15,1

                10,9    10,8


         5,6




          2009            2010              2011            2012


The portfolio of repoable securities includes exposure to Portuguese sovereign debt of EUR
3.2 billion, as well as exposure to other peripheral countries’ sovereign debt, namely EUR
606 million to Spanish public debt, EUR 25 million to Irish public debt, EUR 28 million to
Italian public debt and EUR 3 million to Greek public debt.

These assets guaranteed access to the main longer-term refinancing operations, which were
fundamental during the first half of the year (in which medium and long-term debt
redemptions were concentrated) to overcome the inaccessibility to the short and medium
term markets.

As referred to above, at the end of the year the Group’s net borrowing position at the ECB
was EUR 6.9 billion, broken down as follows:

(i)       EUR 10.2 billion under 3-year LTROs

(ii)      EUR 3.4 billion of placements with the BCE.




                                      185
Net ECB funding evolution in 2012

     EUR bn

                                            Inflows: -7,1                                            Out flows: +5,3
    8,7
                                                                                                                       -1,4   6,9
               +1,0
                            +0,8                                                              -3,7       -0,2


                                          +3,2
                                                     +0,7          +0,3
                                                                                    +1,1

    Dez 11   Rigths issue     Loan      Securities   Insurance     Deposits      MLT        MLT                        CP's   Dec 12
                            portfolio                              Increase    Issuance redemptions BES Vida
                            reduction




The implementation of the referred guidelines permitted refinancing of all the debt maturing
before the end of the year, including the EUR 3.4 billion medium and long-term debt
reimbursed during the year, to improve the loans to deposits ratio by 4 p.p., to 137 per cent.
and to reduce net funding from the ECB by EUR 1.8 billion.

Loan to deposits ratio evolution



          192%                                                            -4 p.p.

                                 165%
                                                           141%                       137%




          2009                     2010                     2011                       2012


In 2013 medium and long term debt redemptions totalled EUR 1.9 billion and were mainly
concentrated in the first half of the year. Of the amount coming to maturity, ca. 26 per cent.
has been refinanced, namely through the EUR 500 million bond issue made by BES in
January 2013.




                                                     186
             Maturity Profile


                  EUR bn                                              reimbursed



                  4,3

                           3,4
                                                                               3,2
                                               2013: 1,9
                                                                      2,3

                                              1,2
                                   0,7
                                                           0    0

                  2011     2012    1Q13    2Q13       3Q13     4Q13   2014    2015


10.   Financial Statements of the BES Group

      The consolidated financial statements for the years ended 31st December, 2011, 2012 and the
      financial information in the Q1 2012 Announcement were prepared in accordance with IFRS as
      adopted for use in the European Union.




                                                187
                                      CONSOLIDATED BALANCE SHEET
                             AS AT 31 DECEMBER 2012 AND AT 31 DECEMBER 2011
                                                                                           (in t housands of euro)

                                                                          31.12.2012            31.12.2011


Asset s
Cash and deposit s at cent ral banks                                         1 377 541               1 090 439
Deposit s wit h banks                                                          681 077                 580 813
Financial asset s held for t rading                                          3 925 399               3 434 639
Ot her financial asset s at fair value t hrough profit or loss               2 821 553               1 963 989
Available-for-sale financial asset s                                        10 755 310              11 482 866
Loans and advances t o banks                                                 5 426 518               3 282 576
Loans and advances t o cust omers                                          47 706 392              49 043 382
Held-t o-mat urit y invest ment s                                              941 549                1 541 182
Derivat ives for risk management purposes                                      516 520                 510 090
Non-current asset s held for sale                                            3 277 540               1 646 683
Invest ment propert ies                                                        441 988                        -
Propert y and equipment                                                        931 622                 851 678
Int angible asset s                                                            555 326                 230 332
Invest ment s in associat es                                                   580 982                 806 999
Current income t ax asset s                                                     24 648                   28 692
Deferred income t ax asset s                                                   728 905                  712 157
Technical reserves of reinsurance ceded                                          3 804                        -
Ot her asset s                                                               2 994 154               3 030 855

Tot al Asset s                                                            83 690 828             80 237 372

Liabilit ies
Deposit s from cent ral banks                                              10 893 320               10 013 713
Financial liabilit ies held for t rading                                     2 122 025               2 125 253
Deposit s from banks                                                         5 088 658              6 239 360
Due t o cust omers                                                         34 540 323              34 206 162
Debt securit ies issued                                                     15 424 061             18 452 648
Derivat ives for risk management purposes                                       125 199               238 633
Invest ment cont ract s                                                      3 413 563                       -
Non-current liabilit ies held for sale                                         175 945                 140 950
Provisions                                                                     236 950                 190 450
Technical reserves of direct insurance                                       1 577 408                       -
Current income t ax liabilit ies                                                221 199                 44 937
Deferred income t ax liabilit ies                                               154 015                110 533
Subordinat ed debt                                                             839 816                 961 235
Ot her liabilit ies                                                          1 145 602               1 321 023

Tot al Liabilit ies                                                       75 958 084             74 044 897

Equit y
Share capit al                                                               5 040 124              4 030 232
Share premium                                                                1 069 517               1 081 663
Ot her equit y inst rument s                                                     29 295                 29 505
Treasury st ock                                                                 ( 6 991)                 ( 997)
Preference shares                                                              193 289                  211 913
Ot her reserves, ret ained earnings and ot her comprehensive income            641 964                360 470
Profit for t he period at t ribut able t o equit y holders of t he Bank           96 101            ( 108 758)

Tot al Equit y at t ribut able t o equit y holders of t he Bank            7 063 299              5 604 028

Non-cont rolling int erest                                                    669 445                 588 447

Tot al Equit y                                                             7 732 744               6 192 475

Tot al Equit y and Liabilit ies                                           83 690 828             80 237 372




                                                             188
                                       CONSOLIDATED INCOME STATEMENT
                                 FOR THE YEARS ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2012 AND 2011

                                                                                                  (in t housands of euro)

                                                                                    31.12.2012          31.12.2011


Int erest and similar income                                                           3 914 109            4 084 862
Int erest expense and similar charges                                                  2 733 601            2 903 271

Net int erest income                                                                  1 180 508             1 181 591

Dividend income                                                                             72 604              167 701
Fee and commission income                                                                 975 062              888 646
Fee and commission expenses                                                             ( 181 144)          ( 130 546)
Net gains / (losses) from financial asset s at fair value t hrough profit or loss        ( 59 408)          ( 178 904)
Net gains / (losses) from available-for-sale financial asset s                            600 206            ( 68 770)
Net gains / (losses) from foreign exchange differences                                   ( 23 788)           ( 32 645)
Net gains/ (losses) from t he sale of ot her asset s                                     ( 42 159)            ( 91 680)
Insurance earned premiums net of reinsurance                                                62 257                    -
Claims incurred net of reinsurance                                                     ( 362 973)                     -
Change on t he t echnical reserves net of reinsurance                                      301 423                    -
Ot her operat ing income and expense                                                       109 562             357 803

Operat ing income                                                                     2 632 150            2 093 196

St aff cost s                                                                            598 883              587 475
General and administ rat ive expenses                                                    442 120              433 753
Depreciat ion and amort isat ion                                                         108 074              107 926
Provisions net of reversals                                                               56 978                6 860
Loans impairment net of reversals and recoveries                                         814 832              600 616
Impairment on ot her financial asset s net of reversals and recoveries                   106 727               73 251
Impairment on ot her asset s net of reversals and recoveries                             220 893              167 602


Operat ing expenses                                                                   2 348 507            1 977 483

Gains on disposal of invest ment s in subsidiaries and associat es                            383                 1 795
Losses arising on business combinat ions achieved in st ages                            ( 89 586)                     -
Share of profit of associat es                                                              8 312            ( 175 231)

Profit before income t ax                                                              202 752              ( 57 723)

Income t ax
  Current t ax                                                                            135 350               72 147
  Deferred t ax                                                                         ( 52 434)           ( 133 666)

                                                                                         82 916             ( 61 519)

Profit for t he year                                                                    119 836                 3 796


At t ribut able t o equit y holders of t he Bank                                         96 101            ( 108 758)
At t ribut able t o non-cont rolling int erest                                           23 735               112 554

                                                                                        119 836                 3 796




                                                               189
                                          CONSOLIDATED CASH FLOW STATEMENT
                                     FOR THE YEARS ENDED 31 DECEMBER 2012 AND 2011
                                                                                                     (in t housands of euro)
                                                                                31.12.2012                31.12.2011

Cash flows from operat ing act ivit ies
Int erest and similar income received                                                 3 866 756               3 891 906
Int erest expense and similar charges paid                                           (2 761 592)             (2 911 344)
Fees and commission received                                                             980 751                894 674
Fees and commission paid                                                               ( 188 981)             ( 143 472)
Insurance premiums                                                                     ( 301 802)                       -
Recoveries on loans previously writ t en off                                               21 900                 26 553
Cont ribut ions t o pensions' fund                                                       ( 86 410)              ( 92 467)
Cash payment s t o employees and suppliers                                            ( 845 776)             (1 088 677)
                                                                                      684 846                 577 173

Changes in operat ing asset s and liabilit ies:
Deposit s wit h cent ral banks                                                       (2 475 433)              3 315 365
Financial asset s at fair value t hrough profit or loss                                1 433 434              ( 173 894)
Loans and advances t o banks                                                           1 225 370              ( 290 655)
Deposit s from banks                                                                  (1 296 220)              ( 171 308)
Loans and advances t o cust omers                                                      ( 388 936)               332 334
Due t o cust omers                                                                       320 144              3 313 699
Derivat ives for risk management purposes                                                226 558               ( 142 821)
Ot her operat ing asset s and liabilit ies                                             ( 470 973)             ( 746 285)
Net cash from operat ing act ivit ies before
   income t ax                                                                       ( 741 210)             6 013 608
Income t axes paid                                                                     ( 39 943)                 46 890
Net cash from operat ing act ivit ies                                                ( 781 153)            6 060 498
Cash flows from invest ing act ivit ies
Acquisit ion of subsidiaries and associat es                                       ( 257 418)                   ( 98 191)
Sale of subsidiaries and associat es                                                   51 613                      5 565
Dividends received                                                                    76 027                    171 894
Acquisit ion of available-for-sale financial asset s                             (69 490 051)              (47 352 062)
Sale of available-for-sale financial asset s                                      72 942 251                47 680 028
Held t o mat urit y invest ment s                                                    648 712                   394 549
Issued insurance invest ment cont ract s                                             200 849                           -
Purchase of t angible and int angible asset s and invest ment propert ies          ( 532 483)                 ( 145 361)
Sale of t angible and int angible asset s and invest ment propert ies                   7 489                        507

Net cash from invest ing act ivit ies                                            3 646 989                    656 929
Cash flows from financing act ivit ies
Capit al increase                                                                     997 746                           -
Acquisit ion of preference shares                                                     ( 11 430)                 ( 41 841)
Bonds issued                                                                      13 218 398                 9 095 624
Bonds paid                                                                       (16 529 485)              (14 422 787)
Subordinat ed debt issued                                                                     -                     8 174
Subordinat ed debt paid                                                             ( 210 096)               ( 989 458)
Treasury st ock                                                                        ( 5 994)                    ( 997)
Int erest from ot her equit y inst rument s                                            ( 2 809)                 ( 21 801)
Dividends paid on ordinary shares                                                             -               ( 146 955)
Dividends paid on preference shares                                                   ( 10 997)                 ( 25 717)

Net cash from financing act ivit ies                                             (2 554 667)              (6 545 758)
Net changes in cash and cash equivalent s                                              311 169                171 669

Cash and cash equivalent s at t he beginning of t he period                          1 542 251              1 341 403
BES Vida full consolidat ion impact                                                     198 648                       -
Effect of exchange rat e changes on cash and cash equivalent s                         ( 27 535)                 29 179
Net changes in cash and cash equivalent s                                                311 169                171 669

Cash and cash equivalent s at t he end of t he period                            2 024 533                  1 542 251


Cash and cash equivalent s includes:
Cash                                                                                    303 538                 278 179
Deposit s at Cent ral Banks                                                           1 074 003                 812 260
  of which, rest rict ed balances                                                      ( 34 085)              ( 129 001)
Deposit s wit h banks                                                                   681 077                 580 813

Tot al                                                                           2 024 533                  1 542 251




                                                                    190
11.   Recent Developments

      On 7th May, 2013, the unaudited results of BES and its consolidated subsidiaries for the three-month
      period ended 31st March, 2013, prepared in accordance with IFRS as adopted by the European
      Union, were announced. The following is a summary of those results:

             The loan book grew by 0.6 per cent. compared to the previous year (which represents an
              increase of EUR 283 million), underpinned by corporate loans, which were up by 2.1 per
              cent. (which represents an increase of EUR 761 million) compared to the previous year and
              by EUR 868 million in the quarter (an increase of 6.9 per cent. in annualised terms) inverting
              the downward trend since June 2011. Loans to individuals decreased by 3.4 per cent. due to
              the contraction of demand and the reimbursement of mortgage loans.

             However the strong increase in customer funds (+7.0 per cent.; +EUR 3.8 billion) positively
              impacted the transformation ratio, which dropped to 129 per cent. (March 2012: 135 per
              cent.); at the end of 1Q13 the BES Group’s net funding from the European Central Bank (the
              “ECB”) was EUR 7.9 billion (March 2012: EUR 12.1 billion), after the early repayment in
              January of EUR 1.0 billion of the LTRO facility. The pool of collaterals eligible for
              rediscount with the ECB reached EUR 25.4 billion (March 2012: EUR 24.2 billion).

             The economic recession (GDP has been falling for 10 consecutive quarters) harmed income
              generation, (due to the increase in insolvencies and unemployment) driving up impairment
              costs. Banking income fell by 14.2 per cent. and provisions were reinforced by 25.9 per
              cent., leading to a net loss in the first quarter of 2013 of EUR 62.0 million.

             The international results were affected in general by the deceleration of export/import
              transactions and consequent decrease in documentary credit operations in all operational
              platforms, and in particular by the deleveraging programme imposed on BESA in Angola
              and the start-up phase of investments in Mozambique, Venezuela and Luxembourg.

             The overdue loans (>90 days) ratio increased to 4.34 per cent. (March 2012: 2.96 per cent.)
              and the credit at risk ratio reached 10.1 per cent. (March 2012: 7.15 per cent.). Provision
              charges were consequently increased to 1.46per cent. of gross loans, from 1.17 per cent. in
              1Q12. The balance of provisions for credit increased by 24.3 per cent. compared to the
              previous year, to EUR 2.8 billion.

             The provision coverage of overdue loans (>90 days), at 126.8 per cent., remains comfortably
              above 100per cent., while the coverage of credit at risk was 54.5 per cent. The Provisions for
              Credit/Gross Loans ratio continued to increase, reaching 5.51 per cent. (March 2012: 4.45
              per cent.).

             In line with the strategy for recovery of credit at risk, 57 per cent. of loans to individuals and
              companies are secured by collaterals, securities are proactively executed, driving up the
              value of real estate assets on the balance sheet to EUR 2.0 billion (recorded in BES’
              financial records according to conservative valuations), and sales of these assets reached
              EUR 97 million in 1Q12 (+61 per cent.), with no additional losses.

             The Core Tier 1 ratio was 10.5 per cent., remaining above the Bank of Portugal’s minimum
              requirement (10 per cent.), and 9.9 per cent. under the EBA criteria (minimum required: 9
              per cent.).

             In a survey conducted by the European Consumer Satisfaction Index (“ECSI”) BES ranked
              in 1st place among the five largest Portuguese banks.


                                                    191
      On 16th May, 2013 BES informed the market about a deal for the acquisition of a 18.9 per cent.
      stake in the share capital of Moza Banco, S.A. owned by Geocapital, Gestão de Participações S.A.
      After the completion of the acquisition, BES will hold a 44 per cent. stake in the share capital of
      Moza Banco. This acquisition is subject to the necessary consents and authorisations.

      On 28 June 2013, BES announced that BES Vida had entered into a reinsurance agreement with New
      Reinsurance Company Ltd., a subsidiary of Munich Reinsurance Company, under which New
      Reinsurance Company Ltd. will reinsure the whole of BES Vida's individual life risk portfolio and
      policies in force as of 30 June 2013. This transaction has an estimated positive impact of
      approximately 40 basis points on the consolidated Core Tier I ratio of BES, based on the risk
      weighted assets as at 31 March, 2013, and is part of the measures BES has been taking in order to
      maintain an adequate capital buffer above the minimum requirements.

12.   Supervision and Regulation

      The Bank of Portugal

      The Bank of Portugal is a part of the European System of Central Banks (“ESCB”), which was
      created in connection with the European Economic and Monetary Union (“EMU”). The EMU
      implements a single monetary policy, the main features of which are a single currency – the Euro –
      and the creation of a European Central Bank (“ECB”) and the ESCB. According to the European
      Union (“EU”) Treaty, the primary objective of the ESCB shall be to maintain price stability through
      monetary policy.

      The Bank of Portugal is directed to provide for the stability of the domestic financial system,
      performing for this purpose the function of lender of last resort. This goal is achieved through the
      supervision of credit institutions, financial companies and other entities subject to the supervision of
      the Bank of Portugal.

      According to the Regime Geral das Instituições de Crédito e Sociedades Financeiras, the Legal
      Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies (enacted by Decree Law No. 298/92 of
      31st December, 1992, as amended from time to time), the Bank of Portugal authorises the
      establishment of credit institutions and financial companies based on technical-prudential criteria,
      monitors the activity of the institutions under its supervision and their compliance with the rules
      governing their activities, issues recommendations for the correction of any deviations from such
      rules, sanctions breaches should they occur, and possesses the ability to take extraordinary measures
      of reorganisation.

      The Bank of Portugal has established rules governing solvency ratios, reserve requirements, control
      of major risks and provisions for specific and general credit risks. It monitors compliance with these
      rules through periodic inspections, review of regularly filed financial statements and reports, and
      continuing assessment of adherence to current legislation.

      The Bank of Portugal is also charged with the duty to regulate, oversee and promote the smooth
      operation of payment systems, namely within the scope of its participation in the ESCB.

      Membership of the EU subjects Portugal to compliance with European legislation which may either
      be in the form of regulations, which are directly enforceable in any Member State, or directives
      addressed to the Member States, which may require the enactment of implementing legislation or
      which, as established by the European Court of Justice in several decisions, may be deemed to be
      directly enforceable in a Member State in the event that they are clear, precise and unconditional. In
      addition, the European Commission and the Council of Ministers issue non-binding




                                                    192
recommendations to Member States. The Portuguese authorities have introduced EU directives and
recommendations into legislation to adapt Portuguese laws to European regulatory standards.

Capital Adequacy Requirements

Capital management and solvability ratio

The main objective of the Group’s capital management is to ensure compliance with the Group’s
strategic objectives in terms of capital adequacy, respecting and enforcing the minimum capital
requirements set by supervisors.

The definition of the Group’s strategy in terms of capital adequacy is made by the Executive
Committee and is integrated into the global goals of the Group.

The Group is subject to Bank of Portugal supervision that, under the capital adequacy directive from
the European Commission, establishes the prudential rules to be followed by the institutions under
its supervision. These rules determine a minimum solvability ratio in relation to the requirements of
the assumed risks that institutions have to fulfill.

In the scope of the implementation of the new capital accord Basel II, and using the permission
granted by the new prudential regime established by Decree-Law no.103/2007 and Decree-Law no.
104/2007, the Group was authorised to use, starting 31 March, 2009, the approach based in the use
of internal models for credit risks (Foundation Internal Rating Based Approach – “IRBF”) for credit
risk and the Standardised Approach – “TSA”) for operational risk.

Risk-weighted assets comprise a component reflecting credit risk, but also components that reflect
operational and market risk. Under the current legal framework, credit institutions may calculate the
risk weighting of their assets, insofar as credit risk is concerned, according to a standards-based
approach or based on their own internal risk-management models, in the latter case subject to
authorisation by the Bank of Portugal.

Market risk is defined as the risk of losses in on- and off-balance sheet positions arising from
movements in market prices. Market risk also includes the risks pertaining to interest rate-related
instruments and equities in the trading book and foreign exchange risk and commodities risk
throughout the bank.

Operational risk is defined as the risk of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes,
people and systems or from external events. This definition includes legal risk, but excludes strategic
and reputational risk.

The capital elements of BES Group are divided into: Basic Own Funds, Complementary Own Funds
and Deductions, as follows:

       Core Tier 1: This category includes mainly the share capital, share premiums, eligible
        reserves, net profit for the year retained when certified and non-controlling interests. The fair
        value reserves are excluded except for the deduction of negative fair value reserves
        associated with shares or other equity instruments, is also deductible to Core Tier 1 the
        following balance shets amounts goodwill, intangible assets, negative actuarial deviations
        arising from liabilities with post-employment benefits to employees above the prudential
        corridor limit and, where applicable, the net loss for the period.

       Basic Own Funds (“BOF”): In addition to the amounts considered as Core Tier 1, this
        category includes the preference shares and hybrid capital instruments. It can be deducted
        from capital half of the value converted into equity, above 10 per cent., in financial


                                              193
        institutions and insurance companies. Following the implementation of the International
        Ratings-Based method for credit risk, is now also adjusted 50 per cent. of the expected loss
        amount for exposures on the part that exceeds the sum of value adjustments and existing
        reserves.

       Complementary Own Funds (“COF”): Essentially incorporates the subordinated eligible
        debt and 45 per cent. of the positive fair value reserve associated with equity securities. The
        book value of investments in banking and insurance associates is deducted in 50 per cent. of
        its value and since 2009, is also deducted 50 per cent. of the expected losses of the risk
        positions less any existing provisions, following the application of the International Ratings-
        Based method for credit risk

       Deductions (“D”): Essentially incorporates the prudential amortisation of assets received as
        a recovery of non-performing loans.

Additionally there are several rules that limit the composition of the capital basis. The prudential
rules determine that the COF cannot exceed the BOF. Also, some components of the COF (Lower
Tier 2) cannot exceed 50 per cent. of the BOF.

In December 2008, the Bank of Portugal issued Notice 11/2008, establishing a transitory period of
four years, from December 2009 to December 2012, for the recognition of the actuarial gains/losses
determined in 2008, deducted from the expected return of the fund plan assets for the same year.
This transitory period ended in December 2012 coinciding with the last prudential depreciation.

In May 2011 and in the context of the negotiation of the Financial Assistance Programme to
Portugal, with the European Commission, the European Central Bank and the International
Monetary Fund, the Bank of Portugal issued Notice 3/2011, establishing new minimum levels of
solvency to be followed by the financial groups subject to its supervision. Therefore, Portuguese
credit institutions must reach a Core Tier 1 ratio of no less than 9 per cent. by 31st December, 2011
and 10 per cent. by 31st December, 2012.

At the same time, European banks had to reach a Core Tier 1 ratio of 9 per cent. as defined by the
European Banking Authority (“EBA”). Credit institutions that failed to comply with these
requirements are subject to various measures that may be imposed by the Bank of Portugal,
including possible restrictions on dividends and imposition of fines and other sanctions on not only
the institution but also on its directors and executive officers. The BES Group is in compliance with
the solvency ratio requirements.

At the end of the third quarter of 2011, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision made several
decisions regarding the functioning of the global financial system, which resulted in a set of
recommendations known as Basel III.

Banks will have a transitory period (from 1st January, 2013 to 1st January, 2019) to comply with the
approved rules, aimed at increasing the strength of financial institutions and helping to prevent future
financial crises.

Own Funds and Large Exposures

Credit institutions are required by Portuguese law to maintain an adequate level of own funds, which
shall be at least equal to the minimum share capital. The relevant criteria to determine the level of
own funds is determined by the Bank of Portugal.




                                              194
Under Portuguese law, credit institutions may not incur large exposure (exposure to a client or group
of connected clients with a value equal to or exceeding 10 per cent. of its own funds) to a client or
group of connected clients exceeding 25 per cent. of own funds.

As permitted by the Banking Consolidation Directive, the Bank of Portugal has exempted from this
requirement the exposure to certain assets, including assets constituting credits over central
governments or central banks to which a 0 per cent. risk weighting would be applicable under the
relevant Bank of Portugal regulation.

These exposure limits are not applicable to the risks assumed by a credit institution towards its
subsidiaries, parent undertaking or the subsidiaries of its parent undertaking which are subject to the
supervision of the Bank of Portugal on a consolidated basis, and have their registered office in
Portugal.

Minimum Reserve Requirements

Credit institutions are required to maintain minimum reserves on deposit with national central banks,
calculated as a percentage of certain liabilities. The reserve requirements are set by the ECB and are
currently 1 per cent. of deposits and debt securities, excluding deposits with central banks and other
institutions subject to reserve requirements. Certain liabilities, notably deposits with agreed maturity
over two years, deposits redeemable at notice over two years, repos, and debt securities issued with
an original maturity over two years have a reserve requirement of 0 per cent.

Deposits made with the central bank for the purposes of maintaining reserve requirements earn
interest at the rediscount rate at which the ECB lends to the other European central banks. The
failure of a bank to maintain adequate liquidity may result in (i) a non-interest-bearing deposit with
the ECB or the national central banks (of up to three times the amount of the minimum reserves
which the relevant institution fails to provide) or (ii) an additional payment of up to double the ECB
marginal lending rate or up to five percentage points above the ECB marginal lending rate, applied
to the amount of the minimum reserves which the relevant institution fails to provide.

Deposit Guarantee Fund

The Deposit Guarantee Fund was established in 1992 and started operating in December 1994 and
has administrative and financial autonomy. Credit institutions with head offices in Portugal that
accept deposits must participate in this fund. The financial resources of the Deposit Guarantee Fund
are mainly composed of initial contributions from the Bank of Portugal and participating credit
institutions and, thereafter, periodic contributions from the participating credit institutions.

The annual contribution of each institution is calculated by reference to the average Core Tier 1 ratio
of the previous year and in accordance with the factor determined in Notice no. 11/2012 of the Bank
of Portugal.

When a credit institution is unable to comply with its commitments, the Deposit Guarantee Fund
guarantees the repayment to depositors of up to EUR 100,000 per depositor.

The deposits made on Portuguese territory are guaranteed regardless of the currency in which they
are denominated, and whether the depositor is resident or non-resident in Portugal. However, some
deposits are excluded from the guarantee scheme, such as those made by credit institutions, financial
companies, insurance companies, investment funds, pension funds, pension fund management
companies and central or local administration bodies in their own name and for their own account.
Moreover, in order to prevent a conflict of interest, the Deposit Guarantee Fund does not guarantee
deposits made by an institution’s managing bodies, qualifying shareholders, external auditors and



                                              195
non-financial companies under the control of the credit institution at issue, or which, together with
the latter, belong to the same group.

Borrowing from the Bank of Portugal

The Bank of Portugal has followed a policy of intervening as a lender of last resort in cases of
liquidity shortfalls in the banking system. The basic method of lending employed takes the form of
advances and overdrafts against collateral. For this purpose, the Bank of Portugal discloses a list of
securities eligible as collateral. The rediscount rate is now set by the ECB.

International Capital Flows

The Portuguese authorities have established a programme of liberalisation of international capital
flows in furtherance of the country’s integration into the single market of the European Union.

Investment in Non-financial Companies

According to the Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies, credit
institutions may not have any direct or indirect qualified holding exceeding 15 per cent. of their
regulatory capital. This is not applicable to holdings in credit institutions, financial companies,
financial institutions, pension fund management companies and insurance and reinsurance
companies. In addition, the total amount of qualified holdings held by a credit institution in such
non-banking companies may not exceed 60 per cent. of its regulatory capital.

The Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies also provides that no credit
institution may directly or indirectly own more than 25 per cent. of voting rights in any single non-
financial company for a period longer than three years (five years for shareholdings held indirectly
through venture capital companies and holding companies). These limitations are not applicable to
holdings in other credit institutions, financial companies or auxiliary services companies.

Conduct supervision

The Bank of Portugal has supervisory powers relating to the conduct of credit institutions. These
powers are supported by fiscal, decision-making and sanction powers relating to the rules on the
conduct of business, client relationships, professional secrecy, conflicts of interest and competition,
to which credit institutions are subject. The conduct supervision rules on client relationships consist
of information obligations, rules relating to the management of client complaints, a requirement to
adopt a code of conduct and rules relating to the publicity of credit institutions.

Resolution and recovery plans

Within the context of establishing a legal framework for the crisis in the financial sector, the Legal
Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial Companies was amended in 2012 in order to
establish the obligation of the credit institutions that receive deposits in Portugal to prepare
resolution and recovery plans to be submitted to the Bank of Portugal.

Granting credit to members of the corporate bodies

In general, credit institutions are not authorised to grant credit, in any way, including the granting of
guarantees, to members of their board of directors or audit board, or to companies or other legal
entities directly or indirectly controlled by them.

This limitation does not apply to: (i) operations with a social nature or purpose or those deriving
from personnel policy; (ii) credit granted as a result of the use of credit cards associated with deposit


                                              196
accounts, in conditions similar to the ones applicable to other clients with a similar profile and risk;
(iii) members of the general supervisory board (“Conselho Geral e de Supervisãol”) who are not part
of any financial committee or audit committee, non-executive directors of credit institutions who are
not part of the audit committee, or companies or other legal entities controlled by them; or (iv) the
credit granting operations of certain entities subject to the supervision of the relevant credit
institution.

The members of the board of directors or audit board of a credit institution cannot participate in the
analysis and decision making process relating to operations where they may have a conflict of
interest.

Breach of rules under the Bank of Portugal’s supervision

Breaches of rules under the Bank of Portugal supervision constitute misdemeanours and may result
in the Bank of Portugal imposing fines of up to EUR 5,000,000. Ancillary sanctions may also be
imposed, such as, amongst others, the apprehension of the proceeds obtained through the offence,
public censure, the prohibition of exercising management functions in credit institutions and the
suspension of voting rights of the shareholders of credit institutions.

Other Controls

The Bank of Portugal imposes a number of other controls covering various aspects of a bank’s
business. It administers these controls through reporting requirements and ongoing supervision,
including periodic examinations of the operations and asset portfolios of individual banks and
consolidated banking groups.

CMVM supervision

The regulation and supervision of the securities markets and financial intermediation activities in
Portugal are carried out by the central government, acting through the Ministry of Finance and the
CMVM.

The Ministry of Finance may establish policies relating to markets in financial instruments, investor
protection, financial intermediation activities and generally any matters regulated by the Portuguese
Securities Code. The Ministry of Finance also oversees the CMVM and co-ordinates the supervision
and regulation relating to financial instruments when powers have been delegated to more than one
public entity. When a disturbance in the markets in financial instruments puts the national economy
at serious risk, the Ministry of Finance may, by means of a joint Ministerial Order by the Prime
Minister and the Minister of Finance, impose necessary measures. These may include the temporary
suspension of (i) the regulated markets and certain categories of transactions or activities of their
management entities; (ii) multilateral trading facilities; (iii) settlement systems; (iv) clearing houses
or central counterparties; and (v) central securities depositaries.

The CMVM is the regulatory agency in charge of the supervision and regulation of the securities
markets and financial intermediation services. It is an administrative agency overseen by the
Ministry of Finance. In particular, the responsibilities of the CMVM include the supervision of
certain conduct of business rules relating to financial intermediation activities and markets in
financial instruments and the prudential supervision of certain entities.

For this purpose, the CMVM may issue regulations on matters within the scope of its supervision
powers, including conduct of business rules for providers of investment services, the recognition of
markets for financial instruments, the establishment of rules for the operation of such markets, as
well as rules on public offers and prospectus requirements.



                                              197
The CMVM may, within the course of its supervision activities, carry out inspections, issue
information requests, conduct hearings, require the collaboration of other persons or entities,
including police authorities, disclose information, including in substitution of supervised entities,
conduct investigations and organise a registration system, carry out enforcement actions and impose
administrative sanctions.

BES is subject to the CMVM’s supervision both as a financial intermediary and an issuer of
securities admitted to trading on a regulated market.

Supervisory rules applicable to BES as a financial intermediary

BES and some of its Portuguese subsidiaries, the main ones being BESI and ESAF, are authorised as
financial intermediaries. They are subject to the supervision of the CMVM in relation to their
performance of financial intermediation activities.

The conduct of business rules applicable to financial intermediaries are laid out in the Portuguese
Securities Code, CMVM regulations and legislation applicable to specific financial intermediation
activities.

Conduct of Business Rules

For the provision of regulated activities, financial intermediaries such as BES must comply with
conduct of business rules set out in the Legal Framework of Credit Institutions and Financial
Companies and the Portuguese Securities Code as well as those which may be established by
CMVM regulation or special legislation.

As a general principle, financial intermediaries must conduct their activity in a manner which
protects the legal interests of their clients and the efficiency of the market. In their dealings with
other market parties, financial intermediaries must observe the dictates of good faith, in accordance
with high standards of diligence, loyalty and transparency.

The main conduct of business rules applicable to financial intermediaries carrying out financial
intermediation activities relate to: (i) “know your client” obligations, including the obligation to
conduct tests on the suitability and adequacy of the services or products for each client; (ii) the
financial intermediaries’ human, material and technical resources; (iii) complaint procedures; (iv)
segregation of clients’ assets; (v) record keeping and reporting; (vi) conflicts of interest policy; and
(vii) information obligations.

Supervisory Rules Applicable to BES as an Issuer of Shares Admitted to Trading in a
Regulated Market

A company whose shares are admitted to trading on a regulated market must, in addition to all the
disclosure rules established in the Portuguese Companies Code, disclose to the CMVM and the
public on its own website information regarding its organisation, the main aspects of its activity and
how its business is conducted.

The main rules concern: (i) the obligation to disclose to the CMVM and the public on its own
website all notices received regarding qualified holdings by third parties in the company’s share
capital and the relevant annual, semi-annual and quarterly financial and management information;
(ii) specific procedures for postal votes and proxies for the exercise of voting rights in the company’s
general shareholders’ meetings; (iii) disclosure of privileged information; and (iv) the obligation of
the company’s directors and other senior executives to disclose any transactions undertaken by them
in relation to the company’s shares.



                                              198
      CMVM’s Powers

      As stated above, the CMVM supervises the activities and participants in the financial markets in
      Portugal. The CMVM has the power to introduce binding regulations, take appropriate enforcement
      measures to sanction breaches of these regulations and of the Portuguese Securities Code, and to
      sanction such breaches.

      When exercising its powers, the CMVM has the right, among others, to request non-public
      information, including information otherwise subject to professional confidentiality obligations, hold
      hearings, undertake investigations and summon people to co-operate with such investigations, and
      take the place of supervised entities to provide information to the market.

      The CMVM also operates an information disclosure system which can be used by parties subject to
      disclosure rules as a cost effective and efficient means of complying with information rules.

      Breach of Rules under the CMVM’s Supervision

      A breach of the rules laid down in the Portuguese Securities Code may constitute a crime or
      misdemeanour.

      Crimes

      Market manipulation and the abuse of privileged information are punishable with prison sentences of
      up to five years and with ancillary administrative sanctions that include the prohibition against
      exercising any intermediation activity, interdiction from participating in the management of a
      publicly-traded company or financial intermediary, the publication of the notice of the crime and the
      apprehension of any proceeds of the illegal activity.

      Misdemeanours

      Different levels of misdemeanour are punishable by different penalties. Very serious
      misdemeanours, such as the disclosure of untrue or misleading information to the market or
      undertaking an offer without the disclosure of an approved prospectus, are punishable by a fine of up
      to EUR 5,000,000. Serious misdemeanours, such as the failure to disclose publicly-traded
      companies’ shareholders agreements or the breach of the obligation to launch a mandatory public
      offer, are punishable by fines of up to EUR 2,500,000 and less serious misdemeanours are
      punishable by fines of up to EUR 500,000.

      Portuguese Insurance Institute

      BES is also subject to the supervision of the Portuguese Insurance Institute insofar as it is a tied
      insurance mediator.

13.   Shareholders’ Structure

      The following table sets out the main shareholders of BES as calculated pursuant to Article 20 of the
      Portuguese Securities Code as of 30th April, 2013:

                                                                                   March 2013
      QUALIFIED STAKES
                                                                                             % Voting
                                                                        N Shares             Rights

      ESPIRITO       SANTO       FINANCIAL         GROUP,       S.A.


                                                   199
                                                                            March 2013
QUALIFIED STAKES
(Luxembourg)                                                    N Shares            % Voting
                                                                                    Rights
- directly                                                      37,971,362          0.95%

- through BESPAR, SGPS, S.A (controlled by Espirito Santo Financial (Portugal),
SGPS, S.A.,

fully owned by Espirito Santo Financial Group S.A.)             1,417,916,095       35.29%

- through members of its Board of Directors and Supervisory     8,174,109           0.20%
Bodies

- through companies controlled directly and indirectly and/or
members of its Board of Directors

and Supervisory Bodies                                          22,458,331          0.56%

Total attributable                                              1,486,519,897       37.00%

CRÉDIT AGRICOLE, S.A (France)

- directly                                                      434,252,321         10.81%

Total attributable                                              434,252,321         10.81%

BRADPORT, SGPS, S.A*

- directly                                                      194,104,165         4.83%

Total attributable                                              194,104,165         4.83%

SILCHESTER           INTERNATIONAL               INVESTORS
LIMITED (UK)

- directly                                                      224,869,627         5.60%

Total attributable                                              224,869,627         5.60%

PORTUGAL TELECOM, SGPS, S.A

- through PT Prestações - Mandatária de aquisições e gestão     84,109,047          2.09%
de bens, S.A.

- through members of its Board of Directors and Supervisory     485,929             0.01%
Bodies

Total attributable                                              84,594,976          2.10%

WELLINGTON MANAGEMENT COMPANY LLP**

- directly                                                      81,297,790          2.02%


                                           200
                                                                            March 2013
QUALIFIED STAKES
                                                                 N Shares             % Voting
Total attributable                                               81,297,790           Rights
                                                                                      2.02%

* Portuguese company fully owned by Banco Bradesco
(Brazil).

** on the 17th May, 2013 Wellington Management Company LLP reduced it qualified stake to
1,77% of the voting rights of BES.

All of the ordinary shares held by the shareholders of BES have the same voting rights. According to
the Articles of Association of BES, shareholders are entitled to one vote for every 100 ordinary
shares held, although shareholders who own less than 100 shares may pool their shares.

BES is unaware of any arrangements, as of the date hereof, the operation of which may at a
subsequent date result in a change of control of BES.

With the goal of ensuring BES' independence from its shareholders and reducing the possibility of
any eventual abusive exercise of control over BES by its shareholders, BES has adopted relevant
measures including, among others, full transparency in its relations with its shareholders and strict
compliance with the legal provisions namely concerning transactions with related parties and
conflicts of interest.




                                            201
                                                TAXATION

Taxation in the Cayman Islands

Prospective investors should consult their professional advisers on the possible tax consequences of buying,
holding or selling any Note under the laws of their country of citizenship, residence or domicile.

Cayman Islands Taxation

The following is a discussion on certain Cayman Islands tax consequences of an investment in the Notes.
The discussion is a general summary of present law, which is subject to prospective and retroactive change.
It is not intended as tax advice, does not consider any investor’s particular circumstances, and does not
consider tax consequences other than those arising under Cayman Islands law.

Under existing Cayman Islands Laws:

       Payments of interest and principal on the Notes will not be subject to taxation in the Cayman Islands
        and no withholding will be required on the payment of interest and principal to any holder of the
        Notes, nor will gains derived from the disposal of the Notes be subject to Cayman Islands income or
        corporation tax;

       The Cayman Islands currently have no income, corporation or capital gains tax and no estate duty,
        inheritance tax or gift tax;

       No stamp duty is payable in respect of the issue or transfer of the Notes although duty may be
        payable if Notes are executed in or brought into the Cayman Islands; and

       Certificates evidencing the Notes, in registered form, to which title is not transferable by delivery,
        should not attract Cayman Islands stamp duty. However, any instrument transferring title to any
        Note, in registered form, if brought to or executed in the Cayman Islands, would be subject to
        Cayman Islands stamp duty.

Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. was registered under the Companies Law of the Cayman Islands as a foreign
company incorporated in Lisbon, Portugal on 20th October, 1937, which registration was given on 22nd
February, 2000. Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. holds a category “B” Banking Licence issued on 15th March,
2000 under The Banks and Trust Companies Law (1995 Revision) of the Cayman Islands. BES Finance has
obtained an undertaking from the Governor in Council of the Cayman Islands pursuant to the Tax
Concessions Law (1995 Revision) of the Cayman Islands that, for a period of 20 years from 14th January,
1997, no law enacted in the Cayman Islands imposing any tax to be levied on profits, income gains or
appreciations shall apply to BES Finance or its operations and no such tax or any tax in the nature of estate
duty or inheritance tax shall be payable by BES Finance on or in respect of the shares, debentures, or other
obligations of BES Finance or by way of withholding in whole or in part of any payment of dividend or other
distribution of income or capital by BES Finance to its members or any payment of interest or principal or
other sums due under a debenture or other obligation of BES Finance.

Taxation in Portugal

The following is a summary of the material Portuguese tax consequences with respect to the Notes.
The summary does not purport to be a comprehensive description of all the tax consequences that may
be relevant to any particular Noteholder, including tax considerations that arise from rules of general
application or that are generally assumed to be known to Noteholders. This discussion is based on
Portuguese law as it stands at the date of this Prospectus and is subject to any change in law that may
take effect after such date. Prospective investors in the Notes should consult their professional advisers

                                                     202
with respect to particular circumstances and the effects of state, local or foreign laws to which they
may be subject. Noteholders who are in doubt as to their tax position should consult their professional
advisers.

Economic benefits derived from interest, amortisation, reimbursement premiums and other types of
remuneration arising from the Notes are designated as investment income for Portuguese tax purposes.

Notes issued by Bank acting through Cayman Islands branch or London branch or its Luxembourg branch
are subject to the following specific tax considerations:

Payments to be made by the Bank acting through Cayman Islands branch or London branch or its
Luxembourg branch of investment income (including interest) arising from Notes issued by them and
payable to an individual or legal person who is a non-resident in Portuguese territory for tax purposes are not
subject to Portuguese withholding tax provided those payments correspond to costs or charges concerning
the activities of that branch. It should be taken into account that according with the legal provision dealing
with this matter the Secretary of State for Fiscal Affairs (currently Secretàrio de Estado dos Assuntos
Fiscais) has issued the governmental order no. 1132/2006-XVII, of 12th September, which has only entered
into force in respect of Notes issued after 1st January, 2007, stating that, if the proceeds of the Notes issued
by foreign financial branches of Portuguese credit institutions are transferred to the respective headquarters
or to another branch of such Portuguese credit institutions, the investment income (including interest) arising
from such Notes and payable to Noteholders with no residence, effective management or permanent
establishment in Portugal will be considered subject to a Portuguese final withholding tax at a rate of 25 per
cent. (in case of payments to non resident legal persons) or 28 per cent. (in case of payments to non resident
individuals) or 35 per cent. (if such payments are made to (i) residents in blacklisted jurisdictions currently
listed in Portaria 150/2004, of 13th February, 2004, as amended, or to (ii) accounts opened in the name of
one or more accountholders acting on behalf of one or more unidentified third parties the relevant beneficial
owner(s) of the income is/are identified), as the case may be, which may be reduced in accordance with any
applicable double taxation treaty signed by Portugal. In order to benefit from such reduction Noteholders
shall comply with certain procedures and certification requirements of the Portuguese tax authorities, aimed
at verifying the non-resident status and eligibility for the respective tax treaty benefits (currently the form 21
RFI).

Notes issued by the Bank acting through its head office in Lisbon and through its Madeira branch are subject
to the following specific tax considerations:

General tax regime applicable to debt securities

Interest and other types of investment income obtained on Notes by a Portuguese resident individual is
subject to individual income tax. If the payment of interest or other investment income is made available to
Portuguese resident individuals, withholding tax applies, as a rule, at a rate of 28 per cent., which is the final
tax on that income unless the individual elects to include such income in his taxable income, subject to tax at
progressive rates of up to 48 per cent. In the latter circumstance an additional income tax will be due on the
aprt of the taxable income exceeding €80,000 as follows: (i) 2.5 per cent. on the part of the taxable income
exceeding €80,000 up to €250,000 and (ii) 5 per cent. on the remaining part (if any) of the taxable income
exceeding €250,000. Also, if the option of income aggregation is made an additional surcharge at the rate of
3.5 per cent. will also be due over the amount that exceeds the annual amount of the monthly minimum
guaranteed wage. .

Capital gains obtained by Portuguese resident individuals on the transfer of Notes are taxed at a special tax
rate of 28 per cent. levied on the positive difference between the capital gains and capital losses arising from
the transfer of securities and derivatives of each year, unless the individual elects for aggregation to his
taxable income, subject to tax at the current progressive rates of up to 48 per cent.. In the latter circumstance
an additional income tax will be due on the aprt of the taxable income exceeding €80,000 as follows: (i) 2.5


                                                       203
per cent. on the part of the taxable income exceeding €80,000 up to €250,000 and (ii) 5 per cent. on the
remaining part (if any) of the taxable income exceeding €250,000. Also, if the option of income aggregation
is made an additional surcharge at the rate of 3.5 per cent. will also be due over the amount that exceeds the
annual amount of the monthly minimum guaranteed wage. Accrued interest does not qualify as capital gains
for tax purposes.

Interest and other investment income derived from Notes and capital gains obtained with the transfer of
Notes by legal persons resident for tax purposes in Portugal and by non resident legal persons with a
permanent establishment in Portugal to which the income or gains are attributable are included in their
taxable income and are subject to a 25 per cent. tax rate, to which may be added a municipal surcharge
(“derrama municipal”) of up to 1.5 per cent. of its taxable income. A State Surcharge rate will be of 3 per
cent. due on the part of the taxable profits exceeding €1,500,000 up to €7,500,000 and of 5 per cent on the
part of the taxable profits exceeding €7,500,000.

As general rule, withholding tax at a rate of 25 per cent. applies on interest and other investment income,
which is deemed a payment on account of the final tax due. Portuguese financial institutions, pension funds,
retirement and/or education savings funds, share savings funds, venture capital funds incorporated under the
laws in Portugal and some exempt entities are not subject to Portuguese withholding tax.

Investment income paid or made available to accounts opened in the name of one or more accountholders
acting on behalf of one or more unidentified third parties is subject to a final withholding tax rate of 35 per
cent., unless the relevant beneficial owner(s) of the income is/are identified and as a consequence the tax
rates applicable to such beneficial owner(s) will apply.

Without prejudice to the special debt securities tax regime as described below, the general tax regime on debt
securities applicable to non resident entities is the following:

As a rule, interest and other types of investment income obtained by non resident legal persons without a
Portuguese permanent establishment to which the income is attributable is subject to withholding tax at a rate
of 25 per cent. which is the final tax on that income.

Also, as a rule, interest payments on the Notes are subject to a final withholding tax at the current rate of 28
per cent. whenever made to non resident individual persons.

Investment income paid or made available to accounts opened in the name of one or more accountholders
acting on behalf of one or more unidentified third parties is subject to a final withholding tax rate of 35 per
cent., unless the relevant beneficial owner(s) of the income is/are identified and as a consequence the tax
rates applicable to such beneficial owner(s) will apply.

A withholding tax rate of 35 per cent. applies in case of investment income payments to individuals or
companies domiciled in a “low tax jurisdictions” list approved by Ministerial order (Portaria) no. 150/2004
of 13 February, amended by Ministerial Order (Portaria) 292/2011, of 8th November, 2011.

Under the tax treaties entered into by Portugal which are in full force and effect on the date of this
Prospectus, the withholding tax rate may be reduced to 15 per cent., 12 per cent., 10 per cent. or 5 per cent.,
depending on the applicable treaty and provided that the relevant formalities (including certification of
residence by the tax authorities of the beneficial owners of the interest and other investment income) are met.
The reduction may apply at source or through the refund of the excess tax. The forms currently applicable for
these purposes may be available at www.portaldasfinancas.gov.pt.

Capital gains obtained on the transfer of Notes by non resident individuals without a permanent
establishment in Portugal to which gains are attributable are exempt from Portuguese capital gains taxation
unless the individual is resident in a “low tax jurisdictions” list approved by Ministerial order (Portaria) no.
150/2004 of 13 February, amended by Ministerial Order (Portaria) 292/2011, 8th November, 2011 (Lista dos

                                                      204
países, territórios e regiões com regimes de tributação privilegiada, claramente mais favoráveis). Capital
gains obtained by individuals that are not entitled to said exemption will be subject to taxation at a 28 per
cent. flat rate. Under the tax treaties entered into by Portugal, such gains are usually not subject to
Portuguese corporate income tax, but the applicable rules should be confirmed on a case by case basis.
Accrued interest does not qualify as capital gains for tax purposes.

Regarding capital gains obtained on the transfer of Notes by a legal person non resident in Portugal for tax
purposes and without a permanent establishment in Portugal to which gains are attributable are exempt from
Portuguese capital gains taxation, unless the share capital of the non resident entity is more than 25 per cent.
directly or indirectly held by Portuguese resident entities or if the beneficial owner is resident in a “low tax
jurisdictions” list approved by Ministerial order (Portaria) no. 150/2004, of 13 February, amended by
Ministerial Order (Portaria) 292/2011, of 8th November, 2011 (Lista dos países, territórios e regiões com
regimes de tributação privilegiada, claramente mais favoráveis). If the exemption does not apply, the gains
will be subject to corporate income tax at a rate of 25 per cent. Under the tax treaties entered into by
Portugal, such gains are usually not subject to Portuguese corporate income tax, but the applicable rules
should be confirmed on a case by case basis.

Special debt securities tax regime

Pursuant to Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November, 2005 (“Decree-Law 193/2005”), as amended from time
to time, investment income paid to Beneficiaries non-resident in Portugal for tax purposes in respect of debt
securities registered with a centralised securities system recognised in accordance to the Portuguese
Securities Code (currently Interbolsa), as well as capital gains derived from a sale or other disposition of
such Notes, will be exempt from Portuguese taxation. For the withholding tax exemption to apply, the
Decree-Law requires that the Beneficiary: (i) is neither resident in Portuguese territory (nor has any
registered or deemed permanent establishment therein to which interest is imputable); (ii) is not resident in
the countries and territories included in the Portuguese “blacklist” (countries and territories listed in
“Portaria” 150/2004, of 13th February, 2004 as amended), with the exception of central banks and
governmental agencies of those blacklisted jurisdictions and (iii) has no more than 20 per cent. of its share
capital held, directly or indirectly, by Portuguese residents.

For purposes of application at source of this tax exemption regime, Decree-Law 193/2005 requires
completion of certain procedures and certifications. Under these procedures (which are aimed at verifying
the non-resident status of the Noteholder), the Noteholder is required to hold the Notes through an account
with one of the following entities: (i) a direct register entity, which is an entity affiliated with the clearing
system recognised by the Portuguese Securities’ Code; (ii) an indirect register entity, which, although not
assuming the role of the “direct register entities”, is a client of the latter; or (iii) entities managing an
international clearing system, which are entities operating with the international market to clear and settle
securities’ transactions. For the purposes of the exemption granted under Decree-Law 193/2005, the
Portuguese Government has recognised each of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg as entities
managing an international clearing system.

The following is a general description of the rules and procedures for the proof required for the exemption to
apply at source, as they stand as at the date of this Prospectus.

1.      Domestic Cleared Notes - held through a direct register entity

        Direct register entities are required, for the purposes of Decree-Law 193/2005, to register the
        Noteholders in one of two accounts: (i) an exempt account or (ii) a non-exempt account.

        Registration of the Notes in the exempt account is crucial for the exemption to apply. For this
        purpose, the registration of the non-resident Noteholders in an exempt account, allowing application
        of the exemption upfront, requires evidence of the non-resident status, to be provided by the


                                                      205
     Noteholder to the direct register entity before or at the Income Payment Date (as defined below), as
     follows:

     (i)     if the Noteholder is a central bank, public institution, international body, credit or financial
             institution, a pension fund or an insurance company, with its head office in any OECD
             country or in a country with which the Portuguese Republic has entered into a double tax
             treaty, the Noteholder will be required to prove its non-resident status by providing: (a) its
             tax identification; or (b) a certificate issued by the entity responsible for its supervision or
             registration, confirming the legal existence of the Noteholder and its head office; or (c) a
             declaration of tax residence issued by the Noteholder itself, duly signed and authenticated, if
             the Noteholder is a central bank, a public law entity taking part in the public administration
             (either central, regional or peripheral, indirect or autonomous of the relevant country), or an
             international body; or (d) proof of non- residence pursuant to the terms of paragraph (iii)
             below. When the Notes are held by central banks or governmental agencies, the respective
             proof of non-residence in Portuguese territory is provided only once, without need for
             periodical renewal;

     (ii)    if the Noteholder is an investment fund or other collective investment scheme domiciled in
             any OECD country or in a country with which the Portuguese Republic has entered into a
             double tax treaty, it shall make proof of its non-resident status by providing any of the
             following documents: (a) a declaration issued by the entity responsible for its supervision or
             registration or by the relevant tax authority, confirming its legal existence, domicile and law
             of incorporation; or (b) proof of nonresidence pursuant to the terms of paragraph (iii) below;

     (iii)   other investors will be required to make proof of their non-resident status by way of: (a) a
             certificate of residence or equivalent document issued by the relevant tax authorities; (b) a
             document issued by the relevant Portuguese Consulate certifying residence abroad; or (c) a
             document specifically issued by an official entity which forms part of the public
             administration (either central, regional or peripheral, indirect or autonomous) of the relevant
             country. The Noteholder must provide an original or a certified copy of such documents and,
             as a rule, if such documents do not refer to a specific year and do not expire, they must have
             been issued within the three years prior to the relevant payment or maturity dates or, if
             issued after the relevant payment or maturity dates, within the following three months. The
             Beneficiary must inform the direct registering entity immediately of any change in the
             requirement conditions that may eliminate the tax exemption.

     “Income Payment Date” means any date on which the Noteholders are entitled to receive interest or
     other investment income, either in the form of accrued interest or coupon.

2.   Internationally Cleared Notes - held through an entity managing an international clearing
     system

     If the Notes are registered in an account with an international clearing system (either with Euroclear
     or Clearstream, Luxembourg) and the management entity of such international clearing system
     undertakes not to provide registration services in respect of the Notes to (i) Portuguese tax residents
     that do not benefit from either an exemption or waiver of Portuguese withholding tax, and (ii) to
     non-resident entities for tax purposes which do not benefit from the above Portuguese income tax
     exemption, the proof required to benefit from the exemption will be made before or at the Income
     Payment Date as follows:

     (i)     through the presentation of a certificate, on a yearly basis, with the name of each beneficial
             owner, address, tax payer number (if applicable), the identity of the securities, the quantity
             held and also the reference to the legislation supporting the exemption or the waiver of


                                                   206
        Portuguese withholding tax. The form of the notice is set out in Annex 1 to this “Taxation”
        section (which corresponds to the wording and contents of the form of certificate for
        exemption from Portuguese withholding tax on income from debt securities, as contained in
        Order (Despacho) n° 4980/2006, published in the Portuguese official diary, second series, n°
        45, of 3rd March 2006, issued by the Portuguese Minister of Finance and Public
        Administration (currently, Ministro das Finanças e da Administração Pública)); or

(ii)    alternatively, through a yearly declaration that states that the beneficial owners are exempt or
        not subject to withholding tax. This declaration is complemented with a disclosure list, on
        each coupon payment date, of each beneficial owner’s identification, with the name of each
        beneficial owner, address, tax payer number (if applicable), the identity of the securities, the
        quantity held and also the reference to the legislation supporting the exemption or the waiver
        of Portuguese withholding tax. The form of the declaration is set out in Annex 2 to this
        “Taxation” section (which corresponds to the wording and contents of the form of statement
        for exemption from Portuguese withholding tax on income from debt securities, as contained
        in Regulatory Notice (Aviso) n° 3714/2006, published in the Portuguese official diary,
        second series, n° 59, of 23rd March, 2006, issued by the Portuguese Secretary of State for
        Fiscal Affairs (currently, Secretário de Estado dos Assuntos Fiscais).

The two documents referred to in (i) or (ii) above, which are reproduced in Annexes 1 and 2, shall be
provided by the participants (i.e. the entities that operate in the international clearing system) to the
direct registering entities, through the international clearing system managing entity, and must take
into account the total accounts under their management relating to each Noteholder that is tax
exempt or benefits from the waiver of Portuguese withholding tax.

The delivery of the documents referred to in (i) or (ii) above, which are reproduced in Annexes 1 and
2, by the participants to the respective international clearing system managing entities shall follow
the procedures that are from time to time applicable for this purpose by said international clearing
system managing entities.

The international clearing system managing entities shall inform the direct registering entity of the
income paid to each participant for each security payment.

No Portuguese withholding tax exemption shall be granted under Decree-Law 193/2005 if the
requirements set forth therein are not complied with and, consequently, the general Portuguese tax
provisions shall apply as described above. This will be the case whenever the Notes are not
integrated in/ cleared through Interbolsa or in any other centralised depositary system for securities
recognized under the Portuguese Securities Code and complementary legislation.

If the conditions for the exemption to apply are met but, due to inaccurate or insufficient
information, tax was withheld, a special refund procedure is available under the special regime
approved by Decree-Law 193/2005. The refund claim is to be submitted to the direct or indirect
register entity of the Notes within 90 days from the date the withholding took place. A special tax
form for these purposes was approved by Order (“Despacho”) n. 4980/2006 (2nd series), published
in the Portuguese official gazette, second series, n. 45, of 3rd March, 2006 issued by the Portuguese
Minister of Finance and Public Administration and is available at www.portaldasfinancas.gov.pt.

The refund of withholding tax in other circumstances or after the above 90 day period is to be
claimed from the Portuguese tax authorities under the general procedures and within the general
deadlines.




                                              207
Taxation in the United Kingdom

The following applies only to persons who are the beneficial owners of Notes and is a summary
of the Issuer’s understanding of current law and published HM Revenue and Customs
(“HMRC”) practice in the United Kingdom relating to the United Kingdom withholding tax
treatment of payments of principal and interest in respect of Notes. It does not deal with any
other United Kingdom taxation implications of acquiring, holding or disposing of Notes. The
United Kingdom tax treatment of prospective Noteholders depends on their individual
circumstances and may be subject to change in the future. Some aspects do not apply to certain
classes of person (such as dealers) to whom special rules may apply. Prospective Noteholders
who are in any doubt as to their tax position or who may be subject to tax in a jurisdiction
other than the United Kingdom should seek their own professional advice.

Payment of interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch

Provided that it continues to be a bank within the meaning of section 991 of the Income Tax Act
2007 (the “Act”), and provided that the interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its
London branch, is paid in the ordinary course of its business within the meaning of section 878 of
the Act and in accordance with the published practice of HMRC, the Bank, acting through its
London branch, will be entitled to make payments of interest without withholding or deduction for
or on account of United Kingdom income tax. Interest will not be regarded as being paid in the
ordinary course of business where the borrowing relates to the capital structure of the Bank.
Payments of interest on Notes which conform to any of the definitions of Tier 1, 2 or 3 capital
adopted by the Prudential Regulation Authority will not be regarded as paid in the ordinary course of
business for this purpose.

Payments of interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, may be
made without deduction of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax provided that
the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, are and continue to be listed on a
“recognised stock exchange” within the meaning of section 1005 of the Act. The Luxembourg Stock
Exchange is a recognised stock exchange. The Notes will satisfy this requirement if they are
officially listed in Luxembourg in accordance with provisions corresponding to those generally
applicable in EEA States and are admitted to trading on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange. Provided,
therefore, that the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, are and remain so
listed, interest on the Notes will be payable without withholding or deduction on account of United
Kingdom income tax whether or not the Bank, acting through its London branch, carries on a
banking business in the United Kingdom and whether or not the interest is paid in the ordinary
course of its business.

In addition, interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, may be paid
without withholding or deduction on account of United Kingdom income tax where interest on these
Notes is paid by a company, and, at the time the payment is made, the Bank reasonably believes (and
any person by or through whom interest on the Notes is paid reasonably believes) that the beneficial
owner is within the charge to United Kingdom corporation tax as regards the payment of interest;
provided that HMRC has not given a direction (in circumstances where it has reasonable grounds to
believe that the above exemption is not available in respect of such payment of interest at the time
the payment is made) that the interest should be paid under deduction of tax.

Interest on the Notes issued by the Bank, acting through its London branch, may also be paid without
withholding or deduction on account of United Kingdom income tax where the maturity of the Notes
is less than 365 days and those Notes do not form part of a scheme or arrangement of borrowing
intended to be capable of remaining outstanding for more than 364 days.



                                            208
In other cases, an amount must generally be withheld from payments of interest on the Notes issued
by the Bank, acting through its London branch, on account of United Kingdom income tax at the
basic rate (currently 20 per cent.). However, where an applicable double tax treaty provides for a
lower rate of withholding tax (or for no tax to be withheld) in relation to a Noteholder, the
Noteholder may apply to HMRC for the issue of a notice to the Bank, acting through its London
branch, to pay interest to the Noteholder without deduction of tax (or for interest to be paid with tax
deducted at the rate provided for in the relevant double tax treaty).

Payment of interest on the Notes issued by BES Finance or by the Bank (otherwise than through
its London branch)

Payments of interest on these Notes which does not have UK source may be made without deduction
of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax.

HMRC’s power to obtain information

HMRC has powers to obtain information relating to securities in certain circumstances. This may
include details of the beneficial owners of the Notes (or the persons for whom the Notes are held),
details of the persons to whom payments derived from the Notes are or may be paid (including, in
some cases, persons other than individuals) and information and documents in connection with
transactions relating to the Notes and the identity of the security under which interest is paid.
Information may be required to be provided by, amongst others, the holders of the Notes, persons by
or through whom payments derived from the Notes are made or who receive such payments (or who
would be entitled to receive such payments if they were made), persons who effect or are a party to
transactions relating to the Notes on behalf of others and certain registrars or administrators. In
certain circumstances, the information obtained by HMRC may be exchanged with tax authorities in
other countries.

Payment by the Bank, acting through its London branch, under the Guarantee

Under current United Kingdom law, the Issuers understand that it is not clear whether payments
made by the Bank, acting through its London branch, under the Guarantee to a Noteholder will be
subject to any deduction of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax. In any event,
if there were to be any deduction of or withholding on account of United Kingdom income tax, the
Bank, acting through its London branch, would be obliged under Condition 8 of the “Terms and
Conditions of the Notes” to pay additional amounts in respect of any deduction of or withholding on
account of United Kingdom income tax (subject to the exceptions contained in that Condition).

The Proposed Financial Transactions Tax (“FTT”)

The European Commission has published a proposal for a Directive for a common FTT in certain
participating Member States, which may also impact persons not in participating Member States.

The FTT proposal remains subject to negotiation between participating Member States and is the
subject of a legal challenge. Accordingly it is not clear when the FTT will be implemented, if at all,
and what form it will take if it is implemented. However, if implemented in the form currently
proposed, the FTT might apply to certain dealings in the Notes. Prospective holders of the Notes are
advised to seek their own professional advice in relation to the FTT.

EU Savings Directive

Under EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC on the taxation of savings income (the “Directive”),
Member States are required to provide to the tax authorities of another Member State details of
payments of interest (or similar income) paid by a person within its jurisdiction to an individual

                                             209
resident in that other Member State or to certain limited types of entities established in that other
Member State. However, for a transitional period, Luxembourg and Austria are instead required
(unless during that period they elect otherwise) to operate a withholding system in relation to such
payments (the ending of such transitional period being dependent upon the conclusion of certain
other agreements relating to information exchange with certain other countries). A number of non-
EU countries and territories including Switzerland have adopted similar measures (a withholding
system in the case of Switzerland).

The European Commission has proposed certain amendments to the Directive, which may, if
implemented, amend or broaden the scope of the requirements described above. At a meeting on 22
May 2013, the European Council called for the adoption of an amended Directive before the end of
2013.

On 10 April 2013, the Luxembourg Ministry of Finance announced the Luxembourg government’s
intention to abolish the withholding system with effect from 1 January 2015, in favour of automatic
information exchange under the Directive for all interest payments made by Luxembourg financial
operators to individuals resident in another Member State.

Luxembourg Taxation

The following is a summary of certain material Luxembourg withholding tax consequences of
purchasing, owning and disposing of the Notes. It is based on the laws presently in force in
Luxembourg, though it is not intended to be, nor should it be construed to be, legal or tax advice.
The information contained within this section is limited to Luxembourg withholding tax issues and
prospective investors in the Notes should therefore consult their own professional advisers as to the
effects of state, local or foreign laws, including Luxembourg tax law, to which they may be subject.
The following description of Luxembourg tax law is based upon the Luxembourg law and
regulations as in effect and as interpreted by the Luxembourg tax authorities on the date of this
Prospectus and is subject to any amendments in law (or in interpretation) later introduced, whether or
not on a retroactive basis.

Please be aware that the residence concept used under the respective headings below applies for
Luxembourg income tax assessment purposes.

Withholding Tax

(i)     Non-resident holders of Notes

        Under Luxembourg general tax laws currently in force and subject to the laws of 21 June
        2005 as amended (the Laws) mentioned below, there is no withholding tax on payments of
        principal, premium or interest made to non-resident holders of Notes, nor on accrued but
        unpaid interest in respect of the Notes, nor is any Luxembourg withholding tax payable upon
        redemption or repurchase of the Notes held by non-resident holders of Notes.

        Under the Laws implementing the EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC of 3 June 2003 on
        taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments and related agreements
        concluded between Luxembourg and certain dependent and associated territories of EU
        Member States (i.e. Aruba, the British Virgin Islands, Guernsey, the Isle of Man, Jersey,
        Montserrat, Curaçao and Sint Maarten, the Territories), payments of interest or similar
        income made or ascribed by a paying agent (within the meaning of the Directive) established
        in Luxembourg to or for the immediate benefit of an individual beneficial owner or a
        residual entity (within the meaning of article 42 of the Directive), which is a resident of, or
        established in, an EU Member State (other than Luxembourg) or one of the Territories will


                                             210
       be subject to a withholding tax unless the beneficiary of the interest payment elects for the
       exchange of information procedure or for the tax certificate procedure. Responsibility for
       the withholding of the tax will be assumed by the Luxembourg paying agent. The
       withholding tax is 35 per cent. In this respect, the Luxembourg government has recently
       announced that as from 1 January 2015, the withholding tax system will be replaced by the
       exchange of information system in Luxembourg.

(ii)   Resident holders of Notes

       Under Luxembourg general tax laws currently in force and subject to the law of 23
       December 2005 as amended (the Law) mentioned below, there is no withholding tax on
       payments of principal, premium or interest made to Luxembourg resident holders of Notes,
       nor on accrued but unpaid interest in respect of Notes, nor is any Luxembourg withholding
       tax payable upon redemption or repurchase of Notes held by Luxembourg resident holders of
       Notes.

       Under the Law, payments of interest or similar income made or ascribed by a paying agent
       established in Luxembourg to or for the benefit of a beneficial owner who is an individual
       resident of Luxembourg will be subject to a withholding tax of 10 per cent. Such
       withholding tax will be in full discharge of income tax if the beneficial owner is an
       individual acting in the course of the management of his/her private wealth. Responsibility
       for the withholding of the tax will be assumed by the Luxembourg paying agent.

       Pursuant to the Law, an individual beneficial owner who is a resident of Luxembourg and
       who acts in the course of the management of his/her private wealth, may opt for a final 10
       per cent. levy on interest payments made by a paying agent established outside Luxembourg
       in a Member State of the European Union or the European Economic Area or in a
       jurisdiction having concluded an agreement with Luxembourg in connection with the
       Directive. In such case, the 10 per cent. levy is calculated on the same amounts as for the
       payments made by Luxembourg paying agents. The option for the 10 per cent. final levy
       must cover all interest payments made by paying agents to the beneficial owner during the
       entire civil year. The responsibility for the declaration and payment of the final 10 per cent.
       levy with assumed by the beneficial owner.




                                            211
                                                                         ANNEX 1

CERTIFICATE FOR EXEMPTION FROM PORTUGUESE WITHHOLDING TAX ON INCOME
ARISING FROM DEBT SECURITIES (PARAGRAPH 1 OF ARTICLE 17 OF THE SPECIAL TAX
REGIME APPROVED BY THE DECREE-LAW 193/2005, OF 7 NOVEMBER)

The undersigned Participant hereby declares that he holds debt securities covered by the special tax regime
approved by Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November (the Securities), in the following securities account
number ............ (the Account) with .................. (name and complete address of the international clearing
system managing entity).

We will hold these Securities in our capacity of beneficial owner or in our capacity of intermediary, holding
Securities on behalf of one or more beneficial owners, including ourselves, if applicable, all of whom are
eligible for exemption at source from Portuguese withholding tax according to Portuguese legislation.

1.      We are:

        Name: .....................................................................................................................................................

        Residence for tax purposes (full address): ...............................................................................................

        Tax ID Number: .....................................................................................................................................

2.      We hereby certify that, from the date hereof until the expiry date of this certificate:

A.      We are the Beneficial Owner of the following Securities:

        Security ISIN or Common Code                                      Security description                      Nominal position

        •

        And we hereby declare that we are not liable to Portuguese withholding tax, in accordance with the
        applicable legislation, indicated hereafter:

        Special Tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November

        Art. 97 of CIRC (Corporate Income Tax Code) - Exemption from withholding tax B. We are
        intermediaries of the following Securities:

            Security ISIN or Common Code                                  Security description                       Nominal position

            •

        which are held on behalf of:

        Name: .............................................................................. Residence for tax purposes (full address):

        ................................................................................................................................................................

        Tax ID Number: ....................................................................................................................and we
        attach a statement of beneficial ownership, which includes the justification for the exemption of
        personal or corporate income withholding tax.



                                                                               212
3.   We hereby undertake to provide the .................... (name of the international clearing system
     managing entity) with a document proving the exemption of personal or corporate income tax
     referred to in the attached statement of beneficial ownership, whenever the beneficial owner is not a
     central bank, public institution, international body, credit institution, financing company, pension
     fund and insurance company resident in any OECD country or in a country with which Portugal has
     concluded a Convention for the Avoidance of International Double Taxation, on behalf of which we
     hold Portuguese debt securities in the Account.

4.   We hereby undertake to notify the (name of the international clearing system managing entity)
     promptly in the event that any information contained in this certificate becomes untrue or
     incomplete.

5.   We acknowledge that certification is required in connection with Portuguese law and we irrevocably
     authorise ...................... (name of the international clearing system managing entity) and its
     Depositary to collect and forward this certificate or a copy hereof, any attachments and any
     information relating to it, to the Portuguese authorities, including tax authorities.

6.   This certificate is valid for a period of 12 months as from the date of signature:


     Place: ...................................     Date: ....................................

     ............................................   .............................................   .............................................
     Authorised Signatory                           Name                                            Title/Position

     ............................................   .............................................   .............................................
     Authorised Signatory                           Name                                            Title/Position




                                                                    213
                                                                           APPENDIX 1

                                             STATEMENT OF BENEFICIAL OWNERSHIP


The undersigned beneficiary:

Name: ..................................................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

Address: ................................................................................................................................................................

Tax identification number: ...................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

Holding via the following financial intermediary: ...............................................................................................

Name of the financial intermediary: .....................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

Account number: .................................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

The following securities: ......................................................................................................................................

Common/ISIN code: .............................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

Security name: .....................................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

Payment date: ......................................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

Nominal position: ................................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

1.          Hereby declares that he/she/it is the beneficial owner of the above-mentioned securities and nominal
            position at the payment date .………./……../….…...; and

2.          Hereby declares that he/she/it is not liable to withholding tax, in accordance with the applicable
            legislation, indicated hereinafter (tick where applicable):

                        Special Tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November

                        Art. 97 of CIRC (Corporate Income Tax Code) - Exemption from withholding tax


                                                                                    214
                        Art. 9 of CIRC - State, Autonomous Regions, local authorities, their associations governed
                         by public law and social security federations and institutions

                        Art. 10 of CIRC - General Public Interest Companies, Charities and other non-governmental
                         social entities; exemption by the Ministerial Regulation n° .................. , published in Diàrio
                         da República ................

                        Art. 16 of EBF (Tax Incentives Statute) - Pension Funds and assimilated funds

                        Art. 21 of EBF - Retirement Savings Funds (FPR)

                        Art. 23 of EBF - Venture Capital Investment Funds

                        Art. 26 of EBF - Stock Savings Funds (FPA)

                        Other legislation (indicate which)

This document is to be provided to the Portuguese tax authorities, if requested by the latter, as foreseen in the
Article 17 of the Special Tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November.

Authorised signatory:

Name: ..................................................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................

Function: ..............................................................................................................................................................

Signature: .............................................................................................................................................................

..............................................................................................................................................................................




                                                                                    215
                                                                       ANNEX 2

STATEMENT FOR EXEMPTION FROM PORTUGUESE WITHHOLDING TAX ON INCOME
ARISING FROM DEBT SECURITIES (PARAGRAPH 2 OF ARTICLE 17 OF THE SPECIAL TAX
REGIME APPROVED BY THE DECREE-LAW 193/2005, OF 7 NOVEMBER)

The undersigned Participant hereby declares that he holds or will hold debt securities covered by the special
tax regime approved by Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November (the “Securities”), in the following
securities account number ..................... (the “Account”) with ............... (name and complete address of the
international clearing system managing entity).

We hold or will hold these Securities in our capacity of beneficial owner or in our capacity of intermediary,
holding Securities on behalf of one or more beneficial owners, including ourselves, if applicable, all of
whom are eligible for exemption at source from Portuguese withholding tax according to Portuguese
legislation.

1.      We are:

        Name: .....................................................................................................................................................

        Residence for tax purposes (full address): ..............................................................................................

        Tax ID Number: .....................................................................................................................................

2.      We hereby undertake to provide the .................... (name of the international clearing system
        managing entity) with a list of Beneficial Owners at each relevant record date containing the name,
        residence for tax purposes, Tax Identification Number and nominal position of Portuguese debt
        Securities for each Beneficial Owner, including ourselves if relevant, on behalf of which we hold or
        will hold Portuguese debt securities in the Account.

3.      We hereby undertake to notify the ..................... (name of the international clearing system
        managing entity) promptly in the event that any information contained in this certificate becomes
        untrue or incomplete.

4.      We acknowledge that certification is required in connection with Portuguese law and we irrevocably
        authorise ...................... (name of the international clearing system managing entity) and its
        Depositary to collect and forward this certificate or a copy hereof, any attachments and any
        information relating to it, to the Portuguese authorities, including tax authorities.

5.      This certificate is valid for a period of 12 months as from the date of signature:


         Place: ...................................          Date: ....................................

         ............................................        .............................................       .............................................
         Authorised Signatory                                Name                                                Title/Position

         ............................................        .............................................       .............................................
         Authorised Signatory                                Name                                                Title/Position




                                                                             216
                                                                      APPENDIX 2

                                                     LIST OF BENEFICIAL OWNERS


For:

Interest due .......... /............ / ............

Security code (ISIN or Common Code): ..............................................................................................................

Security description: ............................................................................................................................................

Securities Clearance Account Number: ................................................................................................................

We certify that the above Portuguese debt securities are held on behalf of the following Beneficial Owners:

                                                                                                              Legal basis of the exemption from
                                         Tax                                                                          withholding tax
                               identification                Residence                 Quantity of
Name                                 number            fortax purposes                  Securities                    Code(*)              Legislation(**)

•

(*)         Indicate the legal basis of the exemption from withholding tax in accordance with the following
            table:

Code Legal basis of the exemption

1.          Special tax Regime approved by the Decree-Law 193/2005, of 7th November

2.          Art. 97 of CIRC (Corporate Income Tax Code) - Exemption from withholding tax

3.          Art. 9 of CIRC - State, Autonomous Regions, local authorities, their associations governed by public
            law and social security federations and institutions

4.          Art. 10 of CIRC - General Public Interest Companies, Charities and other non-governmental social
            entities

5.          Art. 16 of EBF (Tax Incentives Statute) - Pension Funds and assimilated funds

6.          Art. 21 of EBF - Retirement Savings Funds (FPR)

7.          Art. 23 of EBF - Venture Capital Investments Funds

8.          Art. 26 of EBF - Stock Savings Funds (FPA)

9.          Other legislation

(**)        The fulfilment of this column is mandatory when the code “9” is indicated in the previous column.




                                                                              217
                                        SUBSCRIPTION AND SALE

The Dealers have in an amended and restated programme agreement (the “Programme Agreement”) dated
17th July, 2013, agreed with the Issuers a basis upon which they or any of them may from time to time agree
to purchase Notes. Any such agreement will extend to those matters stated under “Form of the Notes” and
“Terms and Conditions of the Notes” above. In the Programme Agreement, the Issuers have agreed to
reimburse the Dealers for certain of their expenses in connection with the establishment and any future
update of the Programme and the issue of Notes under the Programme.

United States

The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act and may not be offered or sold
within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons except in certain transactions
exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. Terms used in this paragraph have the
meanings given to them by Regulation S under the Securities Act.

The Notes are subject to U.S. tax law requirements and may not be offered, sold or delivered within the
United States or its possessions or to a United States person, except in certain transactions permitted by U.S.
Treasury regulations. Terms used in this paragraph have the meanings given to them by the U.S. Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 and Treasury regulations promulgated thereunder.

The applicable Final Terms will identify whether TEFRA C rules or TEFRA D rules apply or whether
TEFRA is not applicable

Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be
required to represent and agree that it will not offer, sell or deliver Notes (i) as part of their distribution at
any time and (ii) otherwise until 40 days after the completion of the distribution, as determined and certified
by the relevant Dealer, or in the case of an issue of Notes on a syndicated basis, the relevant lead manager, of
all Notes of the Tranche of which such Notes are a part, within the United States or to, or for the account or
benefit of, U.S. persons. Each Dealer has further agreed, and each further Dealer appointed under the
Programme will be required to agree, that it will send to each dealer to which it sells Notes during the
distribution compliance period a confirmation or other notice setting forth the restrictions on offers and sales
of the Notes within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons. Terms used in the
preceding paragraph and in this paragraph have the meanings given to them by Regulation S under the
Securities Act.

Until 40 days after the commencement of the offering of any Series of Notes, an offer or sale of such Notes
within the United States by any dealer (whether or not participating in the offering) may violate the
registration requirements of the Securities Act if the offer or sale is made otherwise than in accordance with
an available exemption from registration under the Securities Act.

Public Offer Selling Restriction under the Prospectus Directive

In relation to each Member State of the European Economic Area which has implemented the Prospectus
Directive (each, a “Relevant Member State”), each Dealer has represented and agreed, and each further
Dealer appointed under the Programme will be required to represent and agree, that with effect from and
including the date on which the Prospectus Directive is implemented in that Relevant Member State (the
“Relevant Implementation Date”) it has not made and will not make an offer of Notes which are the subject
of the offering contemplated by this Prospectus as completed by the final terms in relation thereto to the
public in that Relevant Member State, except that it may, with effect from and including the Relevant
Implementation Date, make an offer of such Notes to the public in that Relevant Member State:




                                                       218
(a)     if the final terms in relation to the Notes specify that an offer of those Notes may be made other than
        pursuant to Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive in that Relevant Member State (a “Non-exempt
        Offer”), following the date of publication of a prospectus in relation to such Notes which has been
        approved by the competent authority in that Relevant Member State or, where appropriate, approved
        in another Relevant Member State and notified to the competent authority in that Relevant Member
        State, provided that any such prospectus has subsequently been completed by the final terms
        contemplating such Non-exempt Offer, in accordance with the Prospectus Directive, in the period
        beginning and ending on the dates specified in such prospectus or final terms, as applicable and the
        Issuer has consented in writing to its use for the purpose of that Non-exempt Offer;

(b)     at any time to any legal entity which is a qualified investor as defined in the Prospectus Directive;

(c)     at any time to fewer than 100 or, if the Relevant Member State has implemented the relevant
        provision of the 2010 PD Amending Directive, 150, natural or legal persons (other than qualified
        investors as defined in the Prospectus Directive) subject to obtaining the prior consent of the relevant
        Dealer or Dealers nominated by the Issuer for any such offer;

(d)     or at any time in any other circumstances falling within Article 3(2) of the Prospectus Directive,

provided that no such offer of Notes referred to in (b) to (d) above shall require the relevant Issuer or any
Dealer to publish a prospectus pursuant to Article 3 of the Prospectus Directive, or supplement a prospectus
pursuant to Article 16 of the Prospectus Directive.

For the purposes of this provision, the expression an “offer of Notes to the public” in relation to any Notes in
any Relevant Member State means the communication in any form and by any means of sufficient
information on the terms of the offer and the Notes to be offered so as to enable an investor to decide to
purchase or subscribe the Notes, as the same may be varied in that Member State by any measure
implementing the Prospectus Directive in that Member State and the expression “Prospectus Directive”
means Directive 2003/71/EC (and amendments thereto, including the 2010 PD Amending Directive, to the
extent implemented in the Relevant Member State), and includes any relevant implementing measure in each
Relevant Member State and the expression “2010 PD Amending Directive” means Directive 2010/73/EU.

United Kingdom

Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be
required to represent and agree that:

(i)     in relation to any Notes issued by BES Finance which have a maturity of less than one year, (a) it is
        a person whose ordinary activities involve it in acquiring, holding, managing or disposing of
        investments (as principal or agent) for the purposes of its business and (b) it has not offered or sold
        and will not offer or sell any Notes other than to persons whose ordinary activities involve them in
        acquiring, holding, managing or disposing of investments (as principal or as agent) for the purposes
        of their businesses or who it is reasonable to expect will acquire, hold, manage or dispose of
        investments (as principal or agent) for the purposes of their businesses where the issue of the Notes
        would otherwise constitute a contravention of Section 19 of the FSMA by the Issuer;

(ii)    it has only communicated or caused to be communicated and will only communicate or cause to be
        communicated an invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the meaning of
        Section 21 of the FSMA) received by it in connection with the issue or sale of any Notes in
        circumstances in which Section 21(1) of the FSMA does not or, in the case of the Bank would not, if
        it was not an authorised person, apply to BES Finance or the Bank; and

(iii)   it has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to anything
        done by it in relation to any Notes in, from or otherwise involving the United Kingdom.

                                                      219
Japan

The Notes have not been and will not be registered under the Financial Instruments and Exchange Act of
Japan (Act No. 25 of 1948; as amended, the “FIEA”). Each Dealer has represented and agreed, and each
further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be required to represent and agree, that it will not offer,
sell, resell, or otherwise transfer any Notes, directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for the benefit of, any
resident of Japan (as defined under item 5, Paragraph 1, Article 6 of the Foreign Exchange and Foreign
Trade Act (Act No. 228 of 1949, as amended)) or to others for re-offering sale, resale, or other transfer,
directly or indirectly, in Japan or to, or for the benefit of, a resident of Japan, except pursuant to an
exemption from the registration requirements of, and otherwise in compliance with, the FIEA and any other
applicable laws and regulations and ministerial guidelines of Japan.

The Cayman Islands

Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be
required to represent and agree that no invitation will be made to the public in the Cayman Islands to
subscribe for or purchase any Notes, whether directly or indirectly.

Portugal

Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be
required to represent and agree that: (i) no document, circular, advertisement or any offering material in
relation to the Notes has been or will be subject to approval by the Portuguese Securities Market
Commission (“Comissão do Mercado de Valores Mobiliários”, the “CMVM”); (ii) it has not directly or
indirectly advertised, offered, submitted to an investment gathering procedure or sold and will not, directly
or indirectly, advertise, offer, submit to an investment gathering procedure, sell, re-sell or re-offer the Notes
in circumstances which could qualify as a public offer of securities pursuant to the Portuguese Securities
Code (“Código dos Valores Mobiliàrios”, the “CVM”); (iii) it has not distributed or caused to be distributed
and will not distribute or cause to be distributed to the public in Portugal the Prospectus or any other offering
material relating to the Notes; (iv) all offers, sales and distributions of the Notes have been and will only be
made in Portugal in circumstances that, pursuant to the CVM, do not qualify as a public placement of Notes
(“oferta pública”); (v) pursuant to the CVM, a private placement of Notes in Portugal or to Portuguese
residents by public companies (“sociedades abertas”) or by companies that are issuers of securities listed on
a market needs to be notified to the CMVM for statistical purposes; (vi) all applicable provisions of the
CVM and any applicable CMVM Regulations and all relevant laws and regulations have been complied with
regarding the Notes, in any matters involving Portugal and the placement or distribution of Notes in the
Portuguese market. Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the
Programme will be required to represent and agree that it shall comply with all applicable laws and
regulations in force in Portugal and with the Prospective Directive, regarding the placement of any Notes in
the Portuguese jurisdiction or to any entities which are resident in Portugal, including the publication of a
Prospectus, when applicable, and that such placement shall only be authorised and performed to the extent
that there is full compliance with such laws and regulations.

Republic of Italy

Each Dealer has represented and agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be
required to represent and agree that the offering of the Notes has not been registered pursuant to Italian
securities legislation and, accordingly, no Notes may be offered, sold or delivered, nor may copies of this
Prospectus or of any other document relating to the Notes be distributed in the Republic of Italy, except:

(i)     to qualified investors (investitori qualificati), as defined pursuant to Article 100 of Legislative
        Decree No. 58 of 24th February, 1998, as amended (the “Financial Services Act”) and Article 34-ter,




                                                      220
        first paragraph, letter b) of CONSOB Regulation No. 11971 of 14th May, 1999, as amended from
        time to time (“Regulation No. 11971”); or

(ii)    in other circumstances which are exempted from the rules on public offerings pursuant to Article 100
        of the Financial Services Act and Article 34-ter of Regulation No. 11971.

Any offer, sale or delivery of the Notes or distribution of copies of this Prospectus or any other document
relating to the Notes in the Republic of Italy under (i) or (ii) above must be:

(a)     made by an investment firm, bank or financial intermediary permitted to conduct such activities in
        the Republic of Italy in accordance with the Financial Services Act, CONSOB Regulation No. 16190
        of 29th October, 2007 (as amended from time to time) and Legislative Decree No. 385 of 1st
        September, 1993, as amended (the “Banking Act”); and

(b)     in compliance with Article 129 of the Banking Act, as amended, and the implementing guidelines of
        the Bank of Italy, as amended from time to time, pursuant to which the Bank of Italy may request
        information on the securities in the Republic of Italy; and

(c)     in compliance with any other applicable laws and regulations or requirement imposed by CONSOB
        or other Italian authority.

Please note that in accordance with Article 100-bis of the Financial Services Act, where no exemption from
the rules on public offerings applies under (i) and (ii) above, the subsequent distribution of Notes on the
secondary market in Italy must be made in compliance with the public offer and the prospectus requirement
rules provided under the Financial Services Act and Regulation No. 11971. Failure to comply with such
rules may result in the sale of such Notes being declared null and void and in the liability of the intermediary
transferring the financial instruments for any damages suffered by the investors.

General

Each Dealer has agreed and each further Dealer appointed under the Programme will be required to agree
that it will (to the best of its knowledge and belief) comply with all applicable securities laws and regulations
in force in any jurisdiction in which it purchases, offers, sells or delivers Notes or possesses or distributes
this Prospectus and will obtain any consent, approval or permission required by it for the purchase, offer,
sale or delivery by it of Notes under the laws and regulations in force in any jurisdiction to which it is subject
or in which it makes such purchases, offers, sales or deliveries and neither the Issuers, the Bank (where the
Issuer is BES Finance) nor any of the other Dealers shall have any responsibility therefor.

None of the Issuers, the Bank (where the Issuer is BES Finance) and the Dealers represents that Notes may at
any time lawfully be sold in compliance with any applicable registration or other requirements in any
jurisdiction, or pursuant to any exemption available thereunder, or assumes any responsibility for facilitating
such sale.




                                                       221
                                       GENERAL INFORMATION

Authorisation

The update of the Programme and the issue of Notes have been duly authorised by resolutions of the Board
of Directors of BES Finance dated 21st January, 1997, 2nd February, 1998, 12th May, 1999, 16th August,
1999, by a Unanimous Written Resolution of the Board of Directors of BES Finance dated 3rd September,
1999, by resolutions of the Board of Directors of BES Finance dated 14th August, 2000, 24th July, 2001,
23rd July, 2003, 5th August, 2004, 30th November, 2005, 16th February, 2007, 11th January, 2008, 12th
February, 2009, 10th December, 2009, 7th April, 2010, 10th May, 2010, 25th October, 2010, 31st October,
2011, 18th May, 2012 and 8th July, 2013. The giving of the guarantee in respect of any Notes issued by BES
Finance and the update of the Programme has been authorised by resolutions of the Board of Directors of the
Bank dated 23rd January, 1997, 17th September, 1998, 9th August, 1999, 28th July, 2000, 23rd July, 2001,
17th July, 2002, 21st July, 2003, 30th July, 2004, 23rd November, 2005, 7th February, 2007, 9th January,
2008, 11th February, 2009, 14th December, 2009 and 2009, 25th October, 2010 and 26th October, 2011,
16th February, 2012 and 3rd July, 2013.

Approval, admission to trading and listing of Notes on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange

Application has been made to the CSSF to approve this document as a base prospectus. Application has also
been made to the Luxembourg Stock Exchange for Notes issued under the Programme to be admitted to
trading on the Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and listed on the Official List of the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange. The Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange is a regulated
market for the purposes of the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive (Directive 2004/39/EC).

Trustee’s reliance on Certificates

The Trust Deed provides that any certificate or report of the auditors or any other person called for by or
provided to the Trustee (whether or not addressed to the Trustee) in accordance with or for the purposes of
the Trust Deed may be relied upon by the Trustee as sufficient evidence of the facts stated therein
notwithstanding that such certificate or report and/or any engagement letter or other document entered into
by the Trustee in connection therewith contains a monetary or other limit on the liability of the Auditors or
such other person in respect thereof and notwithstanding that the scope and/or basis of such certificate or
report may be limited by any engagement or similar letter or by the terms of the certificate or report itself.

Documents Available

So long as Notes are outstanding under the Programme, copies of the following documents will, when
published, be available from the registered office of each of the Issuers and from the specified offices of the
Paying Agents for the time being in London, Lisbon and Luxembourg:

(i)     the constitutional documents of each Issuer (in each case in English);

(ii)    the press release of the Bank dated 7th May, 2013 entitled “Banco Espírito Santo Group Activity and
        Results in 1Q13” presenting the unaudited consolidated financial results for the three month period
        ended on 31st March, 2013;

(iii)   the audited consolidated financial statements of the Bank in respect of the financial years ended 31st
        December, 2012 and 31st December, 2011 (with an English translation thereof), in each case
        together with the audit reports prepared in connection therewith;




                                                     222
(iv)     the audited non-consolidated financial statements of BES Finance in respect of the financial years
         ended 31st December, 2012 and 31st December, 2011, in each case together with the audit reports
         prepared in connection therewith;

(v)      the most recently published audited annual non-consolidated financial statements and the most
         recently published unaudited interim (semi-annual) non-consolidated financial statements of BES
         Finance in each case together with any audit or review reports prepared in connection therewith;

(vi)     the most recently published audited annual consolidated financial statements of the Bank and the
         most recently published unaudited interim (semi-annual) consolidated financial statements of the
         Bank (with an English translation thereof) in each case together with any audit or review reports
         prepared in connection therewith;

(vii)    the Programme Agreement, the Agency Agreement, the Interbolsa Notes Agency Agreement, the
         Trust Deed, any agreement appointing a Common Representative, the forms of the Temporary
         Global Notes, the Permanent Global Notes, the Definitive Notes, the Coupons and the Talons;

(viii)   a copy of this Prospectus; and

(ix)     any future prospectuses, information memoranda, supplements and Final Terms to this Prospectus
         and any other documents incorporated herein or therein by reference.

In addition, copies of this Prospectus, each Final Terms relating to Notes which are admitted to trading on
the Regulated Market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and each document incorporated by reference are
available on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange’s website (www.bourse.lu).

Clearing Systems

The Notes (other than Interbolsa Notes) have been accepted for clearance through Euroclear and
Clearstream, Luxembourg (which are the entities in charge of keeping the records in respect of such Notes).
The appropriate Common Code and ISIN for each Tranche allocated by Euroclear and Clearstream,
Luxembourg will be specified in the relevant Final Terms. The Interbolsa Notes will be cleared through LCH
Clearnet, S.A., the clearing system operated at Interbolsa; the appropriate identification reference for a
Tranche of Interbolsa Notes will be specified in the applicable Final Terms. At the date hereof Interbolsa
only accepts to clear notes denominated in euro. If the Notes are to clear through an additional or alternative
clearing system the appropriate information will be specified in the relevant Final Terms.

Conditions for determining price

The price and amount of Notes to be issued under the Programme will be determined by the Issuer and the
relevant Dealer at the time of issue in accordance with prevailing market conditions.

Financial Statements

The financial statements of the BES Group are prepared in accordance with the International Financial
Reporting Standards (IFRS) as adopted for use in the European Union.

Significant or Material Change

Save as disclosed in section 11 (Recent Developments) of the chapter entitled “Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
and BES Group” found on pages 191 and 192 of this Prospectus, there has been no significant change in the
financial or trading position of the Bank and the Group since 31st March, 2013. There has been no
significant change in the financial or trading position of BES Finance since 31st December, 2012.



                                                     223
There has been no material adverse change in the financial position or prospects of BES Finance or the Bank
or the Group since 31st December, 2012.

Litigation

In August 2007, an officer from BES was accused by the Public Prosecutor for the crime of trading in
influence in connection with the performance of his duties. The court’s final decision was taken in 2012 and
absolved the officer. However, the Public Prosecutor appealed such decision (although having considered
during the trial that there was no evidence of the crime). The final decision from the Court of Appeal is
expected during the second half of 2013.

In December 2008, several Portuguese banks (the “banks”) granted a loan to Banco Privado Português, S.A.
(“BPP”) secured by a guarantee of the Portuguese State (the “State Guarantee”). Upon BPP’s default, the
banks claimed under the State Guarantee. In April 2011, the Privado Clientes – Associação de Defesa dos
Clientes do Banco Privado Português (BBP Clients Protection Association) commenced judicial proceedings
requesting payments made by the Portuguese State to the banks under the State Guarantee to be declared
void, and requesting the restitution to the Portuguese State of any amounts received by the banks under the
State Guarantee, which amounts to €80 million in respect of BES. BES filed its defence in June 2011. The
process is pending to be heard on first instance before the court.

BES and other entities of the BES Group challenged (before court and outsite) the decision to call the
Investors Compensation System (“SII”) due to BBP’s insolvency. At the time BPP’s financial difficulties
began, the legal framework for the SII did not cover investors’ rights in BPP under or in relation to contracts
or asset management with guaranteed return, offshore vehicles, or civil liabilities. A piece of legislation was
subsequently passed, the constitutionality and retroactive application of which are in dispute, which covered
these. BES and other entities of the BES Group are co-plaintiffs in an administrative proceeding on this
issue, filed against SII, currently under court review. In October 2011, the SII issued a statement draft
regarding the obligations that are the subject of the court proceeding by BES and other entities of the BES
Group, which was quantified by SII at EUR20,997,622 with respect to BES only and EUR24,453,648 for the
joint BES Group entities which are SII members, including BES. BES and the BES Group entities contested
this decision in the hearing, and although they were in disagreement, they have made the payment and
commenced, together with other financial institutions, a court proceeding to challenge the decision to call the
SII. The court decision is still pending.

Administrative sanctioning proceedings have been carried out by the Spanish Ministry of Economy against
Banco Espírito Santo, S.A (branch of Spain) for failure to comply with certain administrative obligations
under the applicable Money Laundering legislation in Spain. The outcome of such proceeding (imposing
certain penalties to the entity) has been appealed in administrative jurisdiction by Banco Espirito Santo, S.A
(branch of Spain). The decision on the appeal is still pending.

Two of BES’ directors and three BES’ employees are currently under an investigation – conducted by the
Portuguese Public Prosecutors’ Office – on insider trading. Several managers and employees of BES
provided statements to the Portuguese Public Prosecutor’s Office, in order to explain the rationality of the
operations under investigation and to evidence that in fact no inside information was revealed or used. BES
is actively co-operating with the authorities with the intention of providing a full clarification of the facts in
question and of their absolute compliance with the law.

Auditors

KPMG and Associados, SROC, S.A. Edificio Monumental, Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º 1069 - 006,
Lisbon, Portugal, chartered accountants and registered auditors, a member of Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais
de Contas, are the appointed auditors of BES Finance and have audited the respective financial statements




                                                       224
for the years ending 31st December, 2012 and 2011 prepared in accordance with International Financial
Reporting Standards.

KPMG and Associados, SROC, S.A. Edificio Monumental, Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º 1069 - 006,
Lisbon, Portugal, chartered accountants and registered auditors, a member of Ordem dos Revisores Oficiais
de Contas, are the appointed auditors of the Bank and have audited the respective financial statements for the
years ending 31st December, 2012 and 31st December, 2011 prepared in accordance with the International
Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) as adopted by the European Union.

The auditors of the Issuer have no material interest in the relevant Issuer.

Bank of Portugal requirements

No Subordinated Notes shall be redeemed unless in compliance with the applicable capital adequacy
regulations of the Bank of Portugal from time to time in force. At the date hereof such redemption may not
occur within five years and one day from the Issue Date of the relevant Notes and may only occur with the
prior consent of the Bank of Portugal.

Certain of the Dealers transacting with the Issuers or their affiliates

Certain of the Dealers and their affiliates have engaged in, and may in the future engage in, investment
banking and other commercial dealings in the ordinary course of business with any of the Issuers and/or their
respective affiliates and have received, or may in the future receive, customary fees and commissions for
these transactions.

In addition, in the ordinary course of their business activities, the Dealers and their affiliates may make or
hold a broad array of investments and actively trade debt and equity securities (or related derivative
securities) and financial instruments (including bank loans) for their own account and for the accounts of
their customers. Such investments and securities activities may involve securities and/or instruments of any
of the Issuers and/or their respective affiliates. If any of the Dealers or their affiliates has a lending
relationship with any of the Issuers, certain of those Dealers or their affiliates routinely hedge, and certain
other of those Dealers or their affiliates may hedge their credit exposure to such Issuer and/or their respective
affiliates consistent with their customary risk management policies. Typically, such Dealers and their
affiliates would hedge such exposure by entering into transactions which consist of either the purchase of
credit default swaps or the creation of short positions in the relevant Issuer’s and/or their respective
affiliates’ securities, including potentially the Notes. Any such credit default swaps or short positions could
adversely affect future trading prices of the Notes. The Dealers and their affiliates may also make investment
recommendations and/or publish or express independent research views in respect of such securities or
financial instruments and may hold, or recommend to clients that they acquire, long and/or short positions in
such securities and instruments.

Yield

The yield for any particular Series of Notes will be specified in the applicable Final Terms and will be
calculated on the basis of the compound annual rate of return if the relevant Notes were to be purchased at
the Issue Price on the Issue Date and held to maturity. Set out below is an example formula for the purposes
of calculating the yield of Fixed Rate Notes. The Final Terms in respect of any Floating Rate Notes will not
include any indication of yield.




                                                       225
                                                  
                                                  
                              1         1        
                                   Yield  n * m                                            
                                  1                                                       
                     Coupon           m                                       1          
        IssuePrice                                  Final RedemptionAmount
                       m               Yield                                    Yield  n * m  
                                                                               1            
                                        m                                                      
                                                                                    m 

       Where:

       “Coupon” means the annual coupon as specified in the applicable Final Terms;

       “Yield” means the annual yield to maturity;

       “m” means the number of interest payments in a year; and

       “n” means the number of years to maturity.

       Set out below is a worked example illustrating how the yield on a Series of Fixed Rate Notes could
       be calculated on the basis of the above formula. It is provided for purposes of illustration only and
       should not be taken as an indication of prediction of the yield for any Series of Notes; it is intended
       merely to illustrate the way which the above formula could be applied.

       Where:

       m=2

       n=6

       Coupon = 3.875 per cent.

       Issue Price = 99.392 per cent.

       Final Redemption Amount = 100 per cent.

                                              
                                              
                       1                     
                                     1
                                          6*2                      
                           1  Yield                           
                3.875           2                      1       
        99.392                                  100
                  2              Yield                           6*2 
                                                        Yield      
                                                        1     
                                   2                      2       

       Yield = 3.99 per cent. (calculated by iteration)

       The yield specified in the applicable Final Terms in respect of a Series of Notes will not be an
       indication of future yield.

The issue price and the amount of the relevant Notes will be determined before the filing of the relevant
Final Terms of each Tranche, based on the prevailing market conditions.




                                                       226
                                               THE ISSUERS

    Registered Head Office of Banco Espírito                 Cayman Islands Branch of BES
                   Santo, S.A.                                    PO BOX 10507 APO
            Avenida da Liberdade, 195                        Grand Cayman, Cayman Islands
                1250-195 Lisbon                                  Tel. +351 21 350 86 87
                    Portugal                                    Fax. +351 21 350 89 32
             Tel. +351 21 350 11 57
             Fax. +351 21 350 11 80

              London Branch of BES                            Luxembourg Branch of BES
               10 Paternoster Square                                 1 rue, Schiller
                London EC4M 7AL                                   L-2519 Luxembourg
                 United Kingdom                                  Tel. +352 27 36 25 13
                                                                 Fax. +352 27 36 25 11

                BES Finance Ltd.                                Madeira Branch of BES
       c/o Maples Corporate Services Limited                     Avenida Arriaga, nº 44
            PO Box 309, Ugland House                            Edificio Arriaga, 1º Andar
                  Grand Cayman                                      9000-064 Funchal
                    KY1-1104                                             Portugal
                  Cayman Islands                                 Tel. +351 21 350 86 87
              Tel. +351 21 350 86 87                             Fax. +351 21 350 89 32
              Fax. +351 21 350 89 32

    REGISTERED HEAD OFFICE OF THE                            LONDON BRANCH OF THE
              GUARANTOR                                           GUARANTOR
         Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.                           Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
          Avenida da Liberdade 195                              10 Paternoster Square
             1250 - 142 Lisboa                                   London EC4M 7AL
                  Portugal                                        United Kingdom

                                                TRUSTEE

                                    The Bank of New York Mellon
                                         One Canada Square
                                   London E14 5AL United Kingdom

                                   COMMON REPRESENTATIVE

                      Vieira de Almeida & Associados Sociedade de Advogados R.L.
                                      Av. Eng. º Duarte Pacheco, 26
                                            1070-110 Lisboa
                                                 Portugal

                                                 AGENT

                                    The Bank of New York Mellon
                                         One Canada Square
                                   London E14 5AL United Kingdom

                                  PORTUGUESE PAYING AGENT


0013726-0003167 ICM:17155657.14                    227
                                        Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
                                        Avenida da Liberdade, 195
                                            1250-195 Lisbon
                                                Portugal



                                              PAYING AGENT

                            The Bank of New York Mellon (Luxembourg) S.A.
                                         2-4, rue Eugène Ruppert
                                           L-2453 Luxembourg
LEGAL ADVISERS

   To Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. both as Issuer               To the Issuers as to Cayman Islands law
       and Guarantor as to Portuguese law                               Maples and Calder
        Vieira de Almeida & Associados                           11th Floor, 200 Aldersgate Street
         Sociedade de Advogados R.L.                                    London EC1A 4HD
         Av. Eng. º Duarte Pacheco, 26                                    United Kingdom
                1070-110 Lisboa
                    Portugal

          To the Dealers as to English law                To the Issuer and the Guarantor as to English law
               Allen & Overy LLP                               Freshfields Bruckhaus Deringer LLP
                One Bishops Square                                          65 Fleet Street
                  London E1 6AD                                          London EC4Y 1HS
                  United Kingdom                                          United Kingdom

                             To Banco Espírito Santo, S.A. as to Luxembourg law

                                             Arendt & Medernach
                                                14, rue Erasme
                                              L-2082 Luxembourg

                                                AUDITORS

              To BES Finance Ltd.                                 To Banco Espírito Santo, S.A.
        KPMG & Associados, SROC, S.A.                           KPMG & Associados, SROC, S.A.
              Edificio Monumental                                     Edificio Monumental
        Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º                      Avenida Praia da Vitória, 71A, 11º
               1069 - 006 Lisboa                                       1069 - 006 Lisboa
                     Portugal                                                Portugal




0013726-0003167 ICM:17155657.14                     228
                                              DEALERS

                  Banca IMI S.p.A.                              Banco Espírito Santo S.A.
                   Largo Mattioli 3                             Avenida da Liberdade 195
                    20121 Milan                                    1250 - 142 Lisboa
                        Italy                                           Portugal

   Banco Espírito Santo de Investimento, S.A.                      Barclays Bank PLC
         Rua Alexandre Herculano, 38                              5 The North Colonnade
                1269-161 Lisboa                                       Canary Wharf
                    Portugal                                         London E14 4BB
                                                                     United Kingdom

                    BNP Paribas                             Citigroup Global Markets Limited
                10 Harewood Avenue                                   Citigroup Centre
                 London NW1 6AA                                       Canada Square
                  United Kingdom                                      Canary Wharf
                                                                     London E14 5LB
                                                                     United Kingdom

         Commerzbank Aktiengesellschaft               Crédit Agricole Corporate and Investment Bank
           Kaiserstraße 16 (Kaiserplatz)                      9 Quai du Président Paul Doumer
            60311 Frankfurt am Main                            92920 - Paris La Defense Cedex
                     Germany                                               France

    Credit Suisse Securities (Europe) Limited              Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch
                One Cabot Square                                    Winchester House
                 London E14 4QJ                                 1 Great Winchester Street
                 United Kingdom                                    London EC2N 2DB
                                                                    United Kingdom

           Goldman Sachs International                               HSBC Bank plc
               Peterborough Court                                    8 Canada Square
                 133 Fleet Street                                    London E14 5HQ
               London EC4A 2BB                                       United Kingdom
                United Kingdom

             J.P. Morgan Securities plc                     Landesbank Baden-Württemberg
                   23 Bank Street                                 Am Hauptbahnhof 2
                    Canary Wharf                                    70173 Stuttgart
                   London E14 5JP                                     Germany
                  United Kingdom

            Merrill Lynch International                 Mitsubishi UFJ Securities International plc
               2 King Edward Street                                  Ropemaker Place
                London EC1A 1HQ                                    25 Ropemaker Street
                 United Kingdom                                     London EC2Y 9AJ
                                                                     United Kingdom

     Morgan Stanley & Co. International plc                     Nomura International plc
               25 Cabot Square                                      1 Angel Lane
                Canary Wharf                                      London EC4R 3AB
               London E14 4QA                                      United Kingdom
               United Kingdom


0013726-0003167 ICM:17155657.14                 229
          The Royal Bank of Scotland plc                             Société Générale
                 135 Bishopsgate                                 29 boulevard Haussmann
               London EC2M 3UR                                         75009 Paris
                United Kingdom                                            France

                    UBS Limited                                    UniCredit Bank AG
                 1 Finsbury Avenue                                  Arabellastrasse 12
                 London EC2M 2PP                                     81925 Munich
                  United Kingdom                                        Germany


                                    LUXEMBOURG LISTING AGENT
                                    KBL European Private Bankers S.A.
                                  43A Boulevard Royal L-2955 Luxembourg




0013726-0003167 ICM:17155657.14                    230
