Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                 V.3 – 06.10.2017



This module should be read in conjunction with the Introduction and with the
Glossary, which contains an explanation of abbreviations and other terms
used in this Manual. If reading on-line, click on blue underlined headings to
activate hyperlinks to the relevant module.


                              —————————

Purpose
       To specify the key elements of a risk management framework which
       the MA expects AIs to have in place.

Classification
       A statutory guideline issued by the MA under the Banking Ordinance,
       §7(3).

Previous guidelines superseded
       IC-1 “General Risk Management Controls” (V.1) dated 25.04.03 and
       (V.2) dated 31.12.2010.

Application
       To all AIs.

Structure
       1.     Introduction
              1.1    Background
              1.2    Application
       2.     Key elements of an effective risk management framework
              2.1    Risk governance
              2.2    Risk appetite framework
       3.     Responsibilities of the Board and senior management
              3.1    Overall responsibilities
              3.2    Setting of risk appetite and monitoring
              3.3    Firm-wide risk management


                                        1
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1              Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



            3.4   Use of specialised committees
       4.   Risk management policies, procedures and limits
            4.1   Policies and procedures
            4.2   Risk limits
            4.3   New products and services
       5.   Risk management systems and processes
            5.1   Risk management function
            5.2   Risk management information system
            5.3   Risk measurement and assessment
            5.4   Risk-adjusted performance measurement
            5.5   Sensitivity analysis and stress-testing
       6.   Internal controls, audits and contingency planning
            6.1   Internal control system
            6.2   Internal audit function
            6.3   Compliance function
            6.4   Contingency, business continuity and recovery planning




                                     2
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017




1.     Introduction
       1.1   Background

             1.1.1    Risk-taking is an integral part of banking business. Each
                      AI has to find an appropriate balance between the level
                      of risk the AI is willing and able to take and the level of
                      return it seeks to attain, without undermining its overall
                      financial soundness and viability. An effective risk
                      management framework, that is commensurate with the
                      size and complexity of an AI’s operations, needs to be in
                      place to help ensure that risks are well managed within
                      the AI’s risk appetite and that the necessary systems and
                      controls achieve their intended results.

             1.1.2    According to the “Core Principles for Effective Banking
                      Supervision” issued by the Basel Committee on Banking
                      Supervision in September 2012 (“Basel Core
                      Principles”), banking supervisors should be satisfied that
                      banks have in place a comprehensive risk management
                      process (including Board and senior management
                      oversight) to identify, measure, evaluate, monitor, report
                      and control or mitigate all material risks on a timely basis
                      and to assess the adequacy of their capital and liquidity
                      in relation to their risk profile and market and
                      macroeconomic conditions.

             1.1.3    Consistent with the Basel Core Principles, the HKMA
                      requires AIs, under its risk-based supervisory approach,
                      to establish a sound and effective system to manage
                      each of the eight inherent risks (viz. credit, market,
                      interest rate, liquidity, operational, reputation, legal and
                      strategic) to which they are exposed (see SA-1 “Risk-
                      based Supervisory Approach”). Locally incorporated AIs
                      are also required to have adequate internal systems for
                      assessing capital adequacy in relation to the risks they
                      assume (as prescribed in CA-G-5 “Supervisory Review
                      Process”).

             1.1.4    This module is intended to set out the HKMA’s
                      expectations in respect of AIs’ risk management
                      frameworks. Some of the specific systems and controls



                                        3
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                     Risk Management Framework                                        V.3 – 06.10.2017



                            associated with various inherent risks are separately
                            described in other modules.1

       1.2       Application

                 1.2.1      The standards in this module will be applied to AIs on a
                            proportionate basis, having regard to their size, nature
                            and complexity of operations. Thus, AIs having a
                            relatively small and simple business operation may not
                            need to adopt and operate a risk management
                            framework which is as extensive and as sophisticated as
                            that of a large and complex AI. In general, locally
                            incorporated AIs should apply these standards on the
                            solo-entity basis and, where applicable, the consolidated
                            basis covering their subsidiaries and, to the extent
                            practicable, associated companies and joint ventures
                            which may expose them to significant potential risk. 2
                            International banking groups operating in Hong Kong
                            (whether in the form of a local subsidiary or a branch)
                            should have a local risk management framework
                            appropriate for their Hong Kong operations. If certain risk
                            management functions pertaining to a banking group’s
                            Hong Kong operations are centralized at the group or
                            regional level, the AI, upon request by the HKMA, should
                            be able to demonstrate that the relevant functions
                            performed at the group or regional level are appropriate
                            for the size, nature and complexity of the local operations
                            and are in line with the standards in this module in all
                            material aspects.

                 1.2.2      Failure to adhere to the standards set out in this module
                            may call into question whether an AI continues to satisfy
                            the minimum criteria for authorization in the Banking
                            Ordinance and cast doubt on the fitness and propriety of


1
    For example: CR-G-1 “General Principles of Credit Risk Management”; CR-G-13 “Counterparty
    Credit Risk Management”; TA-2 “Foreign Exchange Risk Management”; IR-1 “Interest Rate Risk
    Management”; LM-2 “Sound Systems and Controls for Liquidity Risk Management”; OR-1
    “Operational Risk Management”; RR-1 “Reputation Risk Management”; and SR-1 “Strategic Risk
    Management”.
2
    Whether the standards should be applied to associated companies or joint ventures will also
    depend on the extent of an AI’s affiliation to the entities and the level of control it can exercise over
    the entities.



                                                     4
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      the AI’s directors, chief executives and other members of
                      its senior management.

2.     Key elements           of   an       effective   risk    management
       framework
       2.1   Risk governance

             2.1.1    Risk governance refers to the formal arrangements that
                      enable the Board of Directors (the Board) and senior
                      management of an AI to establish sound business
                      strategy, articulate and monitor adherence to risk
                      appetite and risk limits, and identify, measure, manage
                      and control risks.

             2.1.2    To ensure effective risk management, an AI should have
                      in place a set of robust risk governance arrangements,
                      whereby responsibilities of the Board and senior
                      management, and among different functions of the AI
                      (and the respective risk owners), are well defined. The
                      risk governance framework should also outline
                      escalation and notification procedures (including
                      vertically to the Board and senior management) as well
                      as potential disciplinary actions for excessive risk-taking
                      by individuals.

             2.1.3    It is generally expected that responsibilities among
                      different functions of the AI are defined in such a way
                      that there are three lines of defence which are
                      independent from each other:

                         the first line of defence is provided by the business
                          units where risks are taken. In the course of
                          conducting business activities, staff in the business
                          units hold frontline positions in the proper
                          identification,    assessment,    management      and
                          reporting of risk exposures on an ongoing basis,
                          having regard to the AI’s risk appetite, policies,
                          procedures       and   controls. The      roles and




                                        5
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                    Risk Management Framework                                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                                responsibilities of risk owners in business units
                                should be clearly defined3;

                               the second line of defence is provided by
                                independent and effective risk management and
                                compliance functions. The risk management function
                                is primarily responsible for overseeing the AI’s risk-
                                taking activities, undertaking risk assessments and
                                reporting independently from the business line, while
                                the compliance function monitors compliance with
                                laws, corporate governance rules, regulations and
                                internal policies; and

                               the third line of defence is provided by an
                                independent and effective internal audit function,
                                which is responsible for providing assurance on the
                                effectiveness of the AI’s risk management framework
                                including the risk governance arrangements
                                (including the first and second lines of defence
                                described above).

                2.1.4     An overview of how these elements fit together is
                          illustrated below, although this illustration is not intended
                          to be prescriptive.




3
    For instance, the person heading a business unit, as a risk owner, should ensure that activities of
    the unit are in line with the AI’s approved risk appetite, approved risk limits are adhered to,
    necessary internal controls and risk management processes (particularly those relating to the
    identification, monitoring and reporting of the use of allocated risk limits) are effectively
    implemented, and any breaches of risk limits and material risk exposures are promptly reported to
    the Chief Risk Officer and the senior management.



                                                  6
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                                                                                    Risk Management Framework                                                                                         V.3 – 06.10.2017




                                                                                         Elements of a sound risk management system

                                                                                                                                        Board of Directors
                                                                                                                               Ultimately responsible for risk
                                                                                                                                       management


                                                                                                                   Specialised Committees
                                                                                                       Responsible for overseeing risk management
                                                                                                                                                                                                Remuneration       Audit
                                                                                              Risk Committee
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Committee       Committee



                                                                                                                       Operational Risk                                         Other Risk
      Asset and Liability                                                            Credit
                                                                                                                        Management                                             Management
         Committee                                                                 Committee
                                                                                                                         Committee                                             Committees




                                                                                Senior Management
                               Responsible for overseeing day-to-day risk management




                                                                                                             Risk
               Individual Business                                                                                                                                            Compliance                         Internal
                                                                                                          Management
                 Units / Activities                                                                                                                                              Unit                           Audit Unit
                                                                                                             Unit
                                                                                                            Responsible for                                                   Responsible for
 Responsible for compliance with                                                                                                                                                                               Responsible for
                                                                                                            day-to-day risk                                                      legal and
  policies, procedures and limits                                                                                                                                                                               independent
                                                                                                             management                                                         regulatory
            (front office)                                                                                                                                                                                        checking
                                                                                                            (middle office)                                                    compliance
                                                                                                                                                   Risk Control & Reporting
                                                                                                          Risk Measurement &
                               Interest Rate Risk




                                                                                                                               Limits Monitoring
                                                                     Operational Risk
                                                    Liquidity Risk




                                                                                                              Assessment
                 Market Risk




                                                                                         Other Risks
 Credit Risk




                                                                                                                                                                     7
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                     Risk Management Framework                                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                 2.1.5     Furthermore, effective risk governance requires a strong
                           risk culture 4 which promotes risk awareness and
                           encourages open communication and challenge with
                           regard to risk-taking across the AI (including vertically to
                           and from the Board and senior management). Obstacles
                           that impede legitimate sharing of information across
                           different functions within an AI (e.g. competition
                           between, or incompatible IT systems among, business
                           lines) should be avoided, as these obstacles may result
                           in decisions being made in silos which may not be in the
                           best interest of the AI as a whole. 5 Information
                           communicated to the Board and senior management
                           should be timely, accurate and presented in an
                           understandable and concise format. Material risk-related
                           information that requires immediate decision or reaction
                           should be promptly presented to senior management
                           and the Board (as appropriate), the responsible officers
                           and, where applicable, the heads of control functions, so
                           that suitable measures can be initiated at an early stage.

                 2.1.6     Risk governance arrangements should be documented
                           and updated as appropriate. An AI should have
                           appropriate procedures in place to ensure that all
                           relevant staff (including business units) are aware of and
                           understand these arrangements and their respective
                           roles in the oversight and management of risk.

       2.2       Risk appetite framework

                 2.2.1     In addition to a set of robust risk governance
                           arrangements, it is also important that an AI’s risk
                           management is underpinned by an effective risk appetite
                           framework, which refers to the policies, processes,
                           controls   and   systems,   with    clearly    defined



4
    Risk culture refers to an AI’s norms, attitudes and behaviours related to risk awareness, risk-taking
    and risk management, and controls that shape decisions on risks. An AI’s risk culture influences
    the decisions of senior management and staff during their day-to-day activities and has an impact
    on the risks they assume.
5
     For the avoidance of doubt nothing in this paragraph is intended to affect an AI’s obligations to
    comply with any Chinese Wall or other legal requirement mandating the maintenance of data
    confidentiality.



                                                   8
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      responsibilities, through which risk appetite            is
                      established, communicated and monitored.

             2.2.2    The risk appetite framework of an AI should be driven by
                      leadership from the Board and senior management,
                      supplemented as appropriate by the involvement of
                      management at functional and affiliated entity levels, for
                      the purpose of providing information and analysis to
                      facilitate the assessment of risk appetite (by senior
                      management) and the review and final approval of a risk
                      appetite framework and statement (by the Board). The
                      framework should facilitate the embedding of the risk
                      appetite into the AI’s risk culture. The establishment and
                      effective implementation of a risk appetite statement and
                      risk limits are key to a sound risk appetite framework
                      (see subsections 3.2 and 4.2 for more details).

3.     Responsibilities of the Board and senior management
       3.1   Overall responsibilities

             3.1.1    The Board and senior management of an AI have the
                      primary responsibility to understand the overall risk
                      profile of an AI and ensure that the risks run by the AI
                      are properly managed. In particular, the Board and
                      senior management must have a clear vision of the
                      significant risks faced by the AI.

             3.1.2    In fulfilling this responsibility, the Board and senior
                      management should, among other things:

                         have sufficient knowledge and expertise to
                          understand all material risks faced by the AI,
                          including the risks associated with new or complex
                          products and high risk activities, and the interaction
                          of these risks under stressed conditions;

                         have direct involvement in setting, and monitoring
                          adherence to, the AI’s risk appetite, which should be
                          commensurate with its operations and strategic
                          goals;




                                        9
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                         create a strong risk culture throughout the AI and
                          ensure that the AI’s risk appetite is well enshrined
                          within the culture;

                         establish an organisation and management structure
                          with a sound control environment, adequate
                          segregation of duties and clear accountability and
                          lines of authority;

                         dedicate sufficient time, effort and resources to
                          overseeing and participating in the AI’s risk
                          management process, with a full and ongoing
                          commitment to risk control;

                         evaluate regularly the risks faced by the AI, and
                          maintain continued awareness of the AI’s business
                          and risk profiles and changes in the operating
                          environment and financial markets that may give rise
                          to emerging risks;

                         ensure that the necessary infrastructure, systems
                          and controls are developed and maintained to
                          support effective risk management and governance;

                         set up effective controls to ensure the integrity of the
                          AI’s overall risk management process and to monitor
                          the AI’s compliance with all applicable laws,
                          regulations, supervisory standards, best practices
                          and internal policies and guidelines;

                         ensure that the AI’s remuneration systems are
                          consistent with, and promote, effective risk
                          management and do not incentivise imprudent or
                          excessive risk-taking (see CG-5 “Guideline on a
                          Sound Remuneration System”); and

                         promote the establishment of regular and
                          transparent communication mechanisms within the
                          organisation.

       3.2   Setting of risk appetite and monitoring

             3.2.1    The Board should develop in collaboration with the
                      senior management and approve an AI’s risk appetite

                                       10
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



                  framework, and ensure that it is consistent with the AI’s
                  strategic, business, capital and financial plans, as well as
                  the AI’s risk-taking capacity and remuneration system.

         3.2.2    The Board is responsible for setting the AI’s overall risk
                  appetite and approving the risk appetite statement
                  recommended by the senior management. While there is
                  no standard means of expressing an AI’s risk appetite, it
                  should be articulated clearly and concisely to facilitate
                  internal communication and implementation. The level of
                  detail and sophistication of an AI’s risk appetite
                  statement should be commensurate with the AI’s
                  business nature and risk management needs. An AI’s
                  risk appetite statement should so far as practicable:

                     express the AI’s overall risk appetite in a manner that
                      is suitable for the nature and complexity of its
                      business, with all relevant risks taken into account,
                      including those arising from off-balance sheet
                      transactions and risks that are less quantifiable (e.g.
                      reputation risk). This may involve assessing both the
                      financial and non-financial implications of risks,
                      through     quantitative    analysis,     stress-testing,
                      reference to historical experience, exercise of
                      judgement or otherwise;

                     set out the maximum level of each material risk and
                      of the overall risks that the AI is prepared to take in
                      pursuit of its strategic and business plans, having
                      regard to the applicable regulatory and legal
                      requirements;

                     address quantifiable risks with quantitative measures
                      that can be translated into risk limits applicable to
                      business units (at individual entities and group level),
                      which in turn can be aggregated and disaggregated
                      to enable measurement of the AI’s risk profile
                      against its risk appetite and risk-taking capacity;

                     include qualitative statements that articulate clearly
                      and concisely the motivations for taking on or
                      avoiding certain types of risks which are less
                      quantifiable in nature (e.g. legal risk, reputation risk


                                    11
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      and conduct risk), and establish some indicators to
                      enable monitoring of such risks;

                     include     key    background     information   and
                      assumptions underlying the established risk appetite,
                      which may, as appropriate, define the boundaries
                      and considerations for the formulation of the AI’s
                      strategic and business plans; and

                     be forward looking, and include appropriate financial
                      targets that are consistent with the AI’s risk appetite,
                      and outline possible measures and actionable
                      elements that reflect the AI’s intended responses to
                      a range of possible events, e.g. a loss of capital or a
                      breach in risk limits. Possible management actions
                      outlined in the statement should be realistic and
                      feasible for restoring capital or reducing risk in
                      adverse situations and should not be inconsistent
                      with the AI’s recovery plan (where applicable).

         3.2.3    The Board should be satisfied that, and should
                  periodically assess the extent to which, the senior
                  management has put in place robust procedures and
                  controls for implementing and monitoring adherence to
                  the AI’s risk appetite framework and its risk appetite
                  statement. Sufficient information should be compiled to
                  facilitate regular assessment by the Board and senior
                  management of the management of risk against the AI’s
                  risk appetite, such as (i) relevant measures of risk (e.g.
                  based on economic capital or stress tests); (ii) a view of
                  how risk levels compare with limits; (iii) the level of
                  capital that the AI would need to maintain after
                  sustaining a loss of the magnitude of the risk measure;
                  and (iv) the actions that management could take to
                  restore capital after sustaining a loss.

         3.2.4    The risk appetite statement should be used as the basis
                  for the Board, senior management, business units and
                  internal control functions to deliberate upon and
                  formulate the AI’s strategic, business, capital and
                  financial plans. Strong direction from, and the
                  engagement of, the Board is critical to sustaining a
                  disciplined risk appetite for the AI. When faced with, and
                  making decisions in response to, new business

                                   12
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      opportunities (e.g. possible business expansion or
                      mergers and acquisitions), market demand for increased
                      risk-taking or the need to react promptly to changes in
                      the external environment (e.g. due to competition or
                      deterioration in economic conditions), the Board should
                      ensure that there is an assessment of the AI’s risk
                      appetite in the decision-making process. In these
                      circumstances, the Board should thoroughly understand
                      the AI’s current risk position relative to its risk appetite,
                      and how that position would be changed if the risk
                      appetite were to be changed. In this regard, stress tests
                      may be used to generate a dynamic view of the AI’s
                      capital, liquidity and risk positions.

             3.2.5    Any changes to the AI’s risk appetite statement should
                      be approved by the Board. The justification for change
                      should be adequately documented.

       3.3   Firm-wide risk management

             3.3.1    The Board and senior management should ensure that
                      effective policies, processes and systems are in place to
                      identify, measure, evaluate, monitor, report and control
                      or mitigate all material risks across business activities,
                      whatever the nature of the exposure arising from those
                      activities (such exposure may be non-contractual,
                      contingent or off-balance sheet in nature).

             Specific responsibilities of the Board

             3.3.2 To ensure adequate oversight of firm-wide risks, the
                   Board should, among other things, be responsible for:

                         approving a firm-wide definition for different types of
                          risk faced by the AI (for risk appetite statement and
                          other purposes);

                         identifying, understanding and assessing the risks
                          inherent in the AI’s business activities or in new
                          products or services to be launched (see also
                          subsection 4.3 below);

                         laying down risk management strategies, and
                          approving a risk management framework developed


                                        13
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      by senior management based on these strategies
                      which is consistent with the AI’s business goals and
                      risk appetite;

                     determining that the risk management framework is
                      properly implemented and maintained by senior
                      management;

                     reviewing the risk management framework
                      periodically to ensure that it remains adequate and
                      appropriate under changing business and market
                      conditions;

                     ensuring that information systems and infrastructure
                      across all business units and control functions are
                      sufficiently resourced and supportive of the AI’s risk
                      management and reporting needs; and

                     ensuring that independent risk management and
                      control functions are robust, truly independent from
                      the AI’s risk-taking functions (both in terms of
                      decision-making and reporting structure), and have
                      sufficient authority, resources, expertise and
                      competence to carry out their functions.

         Specific responsibilities of senior management

         3.3.3    Senior management should be responsible for:

                     formulating detailed policies, procedures and limits
                      for managing different aspects of risk arising from
                      the AI’s business activities, based on the risk
                      management strategies laid down by the Board;

                     designing and implementing a risk management
                      framework to be approved by the Board and
                      ensuring that the relevant control systems within the
                      framework work as intended. The framework should
                      be implemented throughout the whole organisation
                      with appropriate procedures to ensure that all levels
                      of staff are aware of, and understand, their
                      responsibilities with respect to risk management;




                                   14
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                         putting in place processes for reviewing the AI’s risk
                          exposures and ensuring that they are kept within the
                          risk limits set, and that those limits are consistent
                          with the AI’s overall risk appetite, even under
                          stressed conditions;

                         identifying and acting on emerging risks and, where
                          appropriate, reporting any material risks to the Board
                          promptly; and

                         ensuring the competence of managers and staff
                          responsible for risk management and control
                          functions, with appropriate programmes to recruit,
                          train and retain employees with suitable skills and
                          expertise.

       3.4   Use of specialised committees

             3.4.1    While the Board is ultimately responsible for risk
                      management, it may be beneficial for it to delegate
                      authority to appropriate Board-level committees (see
                      also Section 5 of CG-1 “Corporate Governance of
                      Locally Incorporated Authorized Institutions”, and
                      paragraph 3.4.3 below) to carry out some of the risk
                      management tasks described in paragraph 3.3.2 above.
                      Delegation of authority should be made on a formal
                      basis with a clear mandate. Appropriate reports should
                      be submitted regularly to the Board by the committee(s)
                      to which such authority has been delegated.
             3.4.2    It should be clearly recognised, however, that such
                      delegation of authority does not absolve the Board and
                      its members from their risk management responsibilities
                      and the need to oversee the work of the specialised
                      committee(s) exercising delegated authority. Individual
                      members of the Board are expected to have an
                      adequate understanding of the nature of the AI’s
                      business activities and the associated risks as well as
                      the framework, including the major controls (e.g. risk




                                       15
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                    Risk Management Framework                                V.3 – 06.10.2017



                         limits), used to manage the risks. 6 If existing members
                         lack the relevant expertise, bringing in new members
                         with such knowledge or appointing external consultants
                         should be considered.

                3.4.3    As provided in CG-1 “Corporate Governance of Locally
                         Incorporated Authorized Institutions”, all locally
                         incorporated AIs, except restricted licence banks or
                         deposit-taking companies (other than one designated by
                         the Monetary Authority under §3S or §3U of the Banking
                         (Capital) Rules (BCR) as systemically important) with a
                         relatively small and simple business operation and low
                         risk profile, should establish a Risk Committee. All other
                         locally incorporated AIs are also strongly encouraged to
                         do so. The Risk Committee should:
                             be a stand-alone committee and distinct from the
                              Board’s Audit Committee;

                             be chaired by an independent non-executive director
                              with a background in accounting, banking or other
                              relevant financial industry or expertise in risk
                              management. “Dual-hatting” with the chair of the
                              Board or any other committee should be avoided;

                             be composed of a majority of members who are
                              independent non-executive directors. Members of
                              the Risk Committee should collectively possess
                              relevant technical expertise and experience in risk
                              disciplines that are adequate to enable them to
                              discharge their responsibilities effectively;

                             review and recommend for the Board’s approval the
                              AI’s risk management strategies, key risk policies
                              and risk appetite, at least annually;

                             exercise its authority (if delegated by the Board) to
                              review and approve specified types of risk



6
    For example, some members should preferably have practical experience in financial markets and
    risk management or have obtained, from their business activities, sufficient professional
    experience directly linked to such type of activity.



                                               16
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1         Risk Management Framework                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                  management        policies   and   procedures,      as
                  appropriate;

                 review and assess the adequacy of the AI’s risk
                  management framework and policies in identifying,
                  measuring, monitoring and controlling risks and the
                  extent to which these are operating effectively;

                 oversee the establishment and maintenance by
                  senior management of appropriate infrastructure,
                  resources and systems for risk management,
                  particularly in relation to the AI’s adherence to the
                  approved risk appetite and related policies;

                 oversee and discuss the strategies for capital and
                  liquidity management, and those for all relevant risks
                  (on both an aggregated basis and by type of risk) of
                  the AI, to ensure they are consistent with the stated
                  risk appetite;

                 oversee and challenge the design and execution of
                  stress testing and scenario analyses;

                 review periodic reports provided by the senior
                  management (including the Chief Risk Officer) on the
                  state of the AI’s risk culture, risk exposure and risk
                  management activities;

                 ensure that the staff members of the AI responsible
                  for implementing risk management systems and
                  controls are sufficiently independent of the AI’s
                  relevant risk-taking activities; and

                 examine, without prejudice to the tasks of the
                  remuneration committee, whether incentives created
                  by the remuneration system are aligned with the AI’s
                  risk culture and risk appetite, and whether
                  remuneration awards appropriately reflect risk-taking
                  and risk outcomes.




                               17
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                     Risk Management Framework                                  V.3 – 06.10.2017



4.      Risk management policies, procedures and limits
        4.1      Policies and procedures

                 4.1.1     AIs should have clearly defined and documented policies
                           and procedures that enable firm-wide risks to be
                           managed in a proactive manner 7 , with emphasis on
                           achieving:

                               objective and consistent risk identification and
                                measurement approaches;

                               comprehensive and rigorous risk assessment and
                                reporting systems;

                               sound valuation and stress-testing practices; and

                               effective risk monitoring measures and controls.

                           Risk management policies and key risk management
                           procedures should be approved by the Board (or its
                           designated committee(s) with the necessary delegated
                           authority). Detailed operating procedures can be
                           approved by the management at the appropriate level.

                 4.1.2     The risk management policies and procedures should be
                           developed based on a comprehensive review of all
                           business activities of an AI, and cover all material risks,
                           both financial and non-financial (e.g. reputation risk)
                           associated with the AI’s activities. They should be
                           prepared on a firm-wide basis and, where applicable, on
                           a group-wide basis.

                 4.1.3     The development of risk management policies and
                           procedures should take account of the following factors:

                               an AI’s overall business strategy and activities;




7
     Overseas-incorporated AIs may, to a large extent, apply the firm-wide policies and procedures set
     by their head offices to their Hong Kong operations, provided that such documents are customised
     to take account of local market conditions.



                                                 18
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



                     the appropriateness to the size, nature                 and
                      complexity of the AI’s business activities;

                     the risk appetite of the AI;

                     the level of sophistication of the AI’s risk monitoring
                      capability, risk management systems and processes;

                     the AI’s past experience and performance;

                     the economic substance of the AI’s risk exposures
                      (including reputation risk and valuation uncertainty);

                     the results of sensitivity analysis and stress tests;

                     anticipated internal or external changes (e.g.
                      planned operational changes or expected changes in
                      market conditions); and

                     any legal and regulatory requirements.

         4.1.4    Accountability and the lines of authority for each
                  business line or unit (including the head and any other
                  relevant principal officers of such business line or unit),
                  should be spelled out clearly in the policies and
                  procedures, and updated as appropriate.

         4.1.5    The risk management policies and procedures should
                  keep pace with the changing environment. The Board or
                  its designated committee(s) should review the risk
                  management policies and key risk management
                  procedures on a regular basis (e.g. at least annually). If
                  the review is carried out by the Board’s committee(s) or
                  senior management, any material amendment to the
                  policies and procedures should be approved by the
                  Board.

         4.1.6    Where appropriate, the risk management policies and
                  procedures should also cover the use of risk-mitigating
                  techniques (e.g. hedging, buying insurance protection or
                  using credit derivatives). If AIs employ risk-mitigating
                  techniques, they should understand the risk to be
                  mitigated and the potential effects of that mitigation
                  (including its effectiveness and enforceability), and have


                                    19
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      in place appropriate measures to control the risks
                      associated with these techniques.

       4.2   Risk limits

             4.2.1    A set of limits should be put in place to control an AI’s
                      exposure to various quantifiable risks associated with its
                      business activities (e.g. credit risk, market risk, interest
                      rate risk and liquidity risk). Limits should also be used to
                      control different sources of risk concentration, including
                      (i) those arising directly from exposures to borrowers and
                      obligors or indirectly through investments backed by a
                      particular asset type, e.g. collateralised debt obligations,
                      and (ii) those resulting from similar exposures across
                      different business activities. These limits should be
                      documented and approved by the Board or its
                      designated committee(s).

             4.2.2    Risk limits should be set in line with an AI’s risk appetite.
                      To ensure consistency between risk limits and business
                      strategies, the Board may wish to approve limits as part
                      of the overall annual budget process.

             4.2.3    Risk limits should be suitable for the size and complexity
                      of an AI’s business activities and compatible with the
                      sophistication of its products and services and should not
                      merely seek to meet the minimum regulatory
                      requirements or the general market practices.
                      Excessively high limits may fail to trigger prompt
                      management action while overly restrictive limits that are
                      frequently exceeded may undermine the purpose of the
                      limit structure. Risk limits should not be overly
                      complicated, ambiguous or subjective.

             4.2.4    Risk limits should be set at various levels, e.g. individual
                      business lines or units, the entity or the group as a
                      whole. AIs should have a clearly documented
                      methodology for allocating overall risk limits across
                      business lines and units.

             4.2.5    The Board or its designated committee(s) should ensure
                      that limits are subject to regular review and are
                      reassessed in the light of changes in market conditions
                      or business strategies.


                                        20
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



             4.2.6    Risk limits should be clearly communicated to the
                      business units and understood by the relevant staff.

             4.2.7    Limit utilisation should be closely monitored. Any
                      excesses or exceptions should be reported promptly to
                      the Chief Risk Officer and the senior management for
                      necessary action.

       4.3   New products and services

             4.3.1    AIs should have an effective mechanism in place to
                      ensure that all products and services launched are
                      subject to proper assessment and approval procedures
                      before launch. There should be an internally approved
                      and clearly documented “new product approval policy”
                      which addresses not only the development and approval
                      of entirely new products and services but also significant
                      changes in the features or risk profile of existing products
                      and services (see Annex 1 for examples). The approach
                      to determining whether changes to existing products and
                      services are considered to be “significant” should also be
                      documented.

             4.3.2    The new product approval policy of an AI and any
                      revisions to it should be approved by the Board (or its
                      designated committee with the necessary delegated
                      authority). The policy should, at a minimum, cover the
                      following areas:

                         all aspects of the decision to enter new markets or
                          new areas of business or to deal in new products or
                          services, including the definition of new product,
                          market, service or business to be adopted by the AI;

                         the internal functions to be involved in the decision
                          (see also paragraph 4.3.5 below);

                         other issues involved in undertaking a new activity.
                          These may relate, for example, to pricing models,
                          profit margin, software and technology, risk
                          management tools, and control procedures; and

                         the process and procedures for approving significant
                          changes to existing products or services. In general,


                                       21
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      such process and procedures should be in line with
                      those for approving new products or services, and
                      any simplification should be suitably justified.

         4.3.3    New products or services should be subject to a careful
                  evaluation or pre-implementation review to ensure that:

                     all relevant parties, including the Board or its
                      designated committee(s), senior management and
                      other managers as appropriate, fully understand the
                      risk characteristics; the underlying assumptions
                      regarding business models, valuation and risk
                      management practices; the potential risk exposure if
                      those assumptions fail; and the possible difficulty in
                      valuing the product involved, especially in times of
                      stress; and

                     there are adequate staffing, technology and
                      resources (financial, risk management, compliance
                      etc.) to launch the product or service, as well as
                      adequate internal tools and expertise to measure
                      and manage the risks associated with it. Any
                      material inadequacies should be properly addressed
                      before launching the new product or service.

         4.3.4    Proposals to introduce new products or services should
                  generally include:

                     a description of the new product or service, and its
                      target customers and underlying objectives (e.g. for
                      meeting customer demand, allowing the AI to better
                      hedge its risks);

                     a detailed risk assessment, including whether the
                      new product or service is within the AI’s risk appetite,
                      implications for the AI’s risk profile (for example, in
                      terms of credit, market, interest rate, liquidity,
                      operational, reputation, strategic, legal and
                      compliance risks) and possible risk transformation if
                      the new product or service is launched (e.g. the use
                      of a hedging instrument to hedge the risk of a new
                      product may result in other risks);

                     a cost and benefit analysis;

                                   22
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                     consideration of the related risk management
                      implications and identification of the resources
                      required to ensure effective risk management of the
                      product or service (e.g. risk mitigation strategies and
                      system enhancement);

                     an analysis of the proposed scale of new activities in
                      relation to the AI’s overall financial condition,
                      including its capital strength and liquidity resources;
                      and

                     the procedures to be used for measuring, monitoring,
                      controlling or mitigating, and reporting the risks.

         4.3.5    All relevant functions, e.g. risk management, accounting,
                  operations, legal and compliance, information technology
                  should be consulted (for instance through a new product
                  committee established within the AI), before a new
                  product or service is launched. Such functions should
                  ensure that the risks associated with the new product or
                  service are adequately addressed from their respective
                  perspectives before sign-off. The Chief Risk Officer
                  should escalate and report to the Board (or its
                  designated committee(s)) if there is any significant
                  concern (e.g. material impact on the AI’s risk profile) with
                  regard to any new product or service before its launch.

         4.3.6    AIs     should    perform     a   comprehensive      post-
                  implementation evaluation of new products or services
                  (as well as existing products or services following any
                  significant changes to their features or risk profile) to
                  ensure no risk remains unidentified or unaddressed. The
                  evaluation results should be taken into account for the
                  development of any similar products or services in the
                  future. In addition, AIs should perform regular reviews of
                  products and services (adopting a risk-based approach
                  as appropriate).

         4.3.7    The Chief Risk Officer should have a holistic oversight of
                  the risks to the AI associated with new products and
                  services and the related risk management processes. To
                  achieve this, the risk management function should
                  monitor and participate in the process of approving new
                  products or services (or significant changes to existing

                                   23
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                     Risk Management Framework                                  V.3 – 06.10.2017



                           products or services), and should maintain a centralised
                           list of approved products and services8. It should have a
                           clear overview of the roll-out of new products or services
                           (or significant changes to existing products or services)
                           across different business units. The risk management
                           function should also be responsible for determining
                           whether a new initiative should be classified or
                           categorised as a new product/service, and have the
                           authority to require that significant changes to existing
                           products or services go through the AI’s formal approval
                           process applicable to new products or services.

                 4.3.8     The internal audit function should undertake regular
                           reviews of the new product approval process
                           encompassing the business units as well as the risk
                           management and internal control functions involved in
                           the process.

5.      Risk management systems and processes
        5.1      Risk management function

                 Key responsibilities and attributes

                 5.1.1     AIs should establish a dedicated risk management
                           function to carry out day-to-day risk management
                           activities across the whole organisation.

                 5.1.2     An effective risk management function should:

                               have    clearly          defined        responsibilities         and
                                accountability;

                               have a direct reporting line to senior management
                                and direct access to the Board or its Risk Committee
                                (see also paragraph 5.1.6 below);

                               be independent from the risk-taking and operational
                                units the activities of which it reviews, and have

8
     If the centralised list of approved products and services is maintained and updated by another
     function, there should be appropriate arrangements to ensure that the risk management function is
     provided with the updated list.



                                                 24
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      unfettered access to information from these units
                      that is necessary for carrying out its duties;

                     be supported by an           effective   management
                      information system; and

                     be given adequate authority, management support
                      and resources to perform its duties, and be staffed
                      by persons with the relevant expertise and
                      knowledge.

         5.1.3    The responsibilities of an AI’s risk management function
                  include:

                     ensuring that all relevant risks of the AI are properly
                      identified, well understood, measured, controlled,
                      assessed and reported. This will include establishing
                      a process, using effective risk measurement
                      techniques and management information systems,
                      for monitoring and reporting on the AI’s risk profile
                      and its consistency with the AI’s risk appetite and
                      strategic and business plans;

                     conducting periodic reviews on the AI’s risk
                      governance arrangements, and ensuring that the
                      AI’s risk management framework (including the AI’s
                      risk appetite framework) and all related policies and
                      control procedures are adequately implemented and
                      working effectively;

                     being actively involved, at an early stage, in the AI’s
                      decision-making on business strategies and
                      developments that may have implications for risk
                      management;

                     monitoring (e.g. through an early warning or trigger
                      system) the use of risk limits and ensuring that the
                      risk limits are consistent with the AI’s risk appetite.
                      This will include ensuring that the risk exposures of
                      individual business units in respect of various risks
                      are properly aggregated and monitored against the
                      aggregate limits for the AI as a whole;




                                   25
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



                     overseeing and approving risk assessment models
                      and internal rating systems (where applicable), and
                      analysing the risks of new products and services
                      (and of significant changes to existing products and
                      services) and exceptional transactions;

                     conducting stress tests to assess the risk profile of
                      the AI under stressed conditions, and reporting the
                      results of the stress tests to the Board (or/and its
                      Risk Committee) and senior management. The
                      results should also be incorporated into the AI’s
                      relevant risk management and business processes
                      (e.g. review of the AI’s risk appetite, capital planning,
                      budgeting, establishment of contingency plans);

                     providing accurate, reliable and comprehensible risk
                      information to the Board, Risk Committee and senior
                      management and ensuring that all identified risk
                      management issues or concerns (together with any
                      proposed risk-mitigating actions) are promptly
                      reported to them; and

                     alerting the Board, Risk Committee and senior
                      management to any other matters that may have a
                      significant impact on the AI’s financial position and
                      risk profile (e.g. engagement in high risk activities
                      that are not aligned with the AI’s risk appetite).

         Chief Risk Officer

         5.1.4    AIs are expected to appoint a person to be responsible
                  for the risk management function, commonly known as
                  the Chief Risk Officer, who should also coordinate the
                  risk management activities of other units within the
                  organisation. It is generally expected that the Chief Risk
                  Officer will be part of the senior management team, and
                  his appointment (or cessation of appointment) will be
                  approved by the Board (or its designated committee)
                  and publicly disclosed. In exceptional cases where, for
                  example, an AI’s size and complexity do not justify
                  specifically appointing a person for such responsibility,
                  one of the senior managers (such as the person in
                  charge of internal control) may share this responsibility,


                                    26
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                  provided that the roles are compatible and do not
                  weaken checks and balances within the AI.

         5.1.5    The Chief Risk Officer should have skills and experience
                  which are relevant and appropriate to the nature and
                  complexity of an AI’s business activities. Moreover, he
                  should have sufficient independence, authority and
                  stature to enable him to challenge any proposal or
                  decision from the risk management perspective. In this
                  regard, the Chief Risk Officer should have unfettered
                  access to any information necessary to perform his
                  duties. The Chief Risk Officer should have duties distinct
                  from other executive functions, and should not have
                  management or financial responsibility related to any
                  business lines or revenue-generating functions.

         5.1.6    The Chief Risk Officer should have a direct reporting line
                  to the AI’s Chief Executive and should also report
                  directly (without the presence of executive directors and
                  the senior management where appropriate) to the Board
                  or its Risk Committee regularly and when necessary on
                  risk management issues. In particular, he should play a
                  key role in enabling the Board, Risk Committee and
                  senior management to understand the AI’s evolving risk
                  profile against the approved risk appetite, and should
                  report to the Board and the Risk Committee promptly on
                  any material breach of risk limits and any adverse
                  development that may result in the AI’s risk appetite
                  being exceeded. The performance and remuneration of
                  the Chief Risk Officer should be reviewed and approved
                  by the Board (or its designated committee).

         5.1.7    As part of his responsibilities for the AI’s risk
                  management function, among other things, the Chief
                  Risk Officer should ensure that prompt action is taken
                  when any material risk exposure is close to, or exceeds,
                  the AI’s approved risk appetite and relevant risk limits.
                  Furthermore, the Chief Risk Officer should participate in
                  key decision-making processes (e.g. strategic planning,
                  capital and liquidity planning, new products and services
                  approvals, remuneration design and operation) and
                  should be involved in the setting of risk-related
                  performance indicators for business units.


                                   27
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                     Risk Management Framework                                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



       5.2       Risk management information system9

                 5.2.1     An AI should establish and maintain a management
                           information system with adequate technological support
                           and processing capacity (even in times of stress) to
                           effectively capture, aggregate and report on the risks of
                           major business activities within the organisation. The risk
                           data aggregation and risk reporting framework and any
                           substantial change to them should be reviewed and
                           approved by the Board (or its Risk Committee) and
                           senior management.

                 5.2.2     The level of sophistication of an AI’s risk management
                           information system should be commensurate with the
                           nature, scale and complexity of the AI’s business
                           activities. Generally, to support decision-making at
                           different levels and enable early identification of
                           emerging risks, it should be capable of:

                                accurately and reliably capturing, aggregating and
                                 reporting risk data in a timely manner, not only in
                                 normal times but also in times of stress. While
                                 different types of data will be required at different
                                 intervals, the system should be able to generate any
                                 necessary data rapidly in times of stress;

                                capturing, aggregating and reporting risk data on all
                                 sources of relevant risks on a range of bases,
                                 including by business line, product, portfolio,
                                 function, and at entity and group levels;

                                supporting customised identification, aggregation
                                 and reporting of risks (e.g. based on individual or a
                                 set of closely related risk drivers) to meet requests of



9
    This section serves to provide some general guidance for application to all AIs (albeit on a
    proportionate basis), having regard to the “Principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk
    reporting” issued by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in January 2013. A higher
    standard is expected of any AI which is designated by the Monetary Authority as a global
    systemically important bank pursuant to section 3S of the BCR or a domestic systemically
    important bank pursuant to section 3U of the BCR. Such an AI should be able to demonstrate that
    it is in full compliance with Principles 1 to 11 of the “Principles for effective risk data aggregation
    and risk reporting” within three years of its designation.



                                                   28
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      the Board, senior management and other users,
                      including the HKMA;

                     incorporating changes arising from regulatory
                      requirements and new business developments as
                      and when necessary;

                     supporting a broad range of risk management
                      analysis, including but not limited to:

                      -   incorporating multiple perspectives of any
                          particular risk exposure to account for changes
                          in assumptions and uncertainties in risk
                          measurement;

                      -   incorporating hedging and other risk-mitigating
                          actions to be carried out on a firm-wide basis
                          while taking into account various related basis
                          risks;

                      -   reporting excesses in limits and policy
                          exceptions, and alerting management of risk
                          exposures approaching pre-set limits;

                      -   facilitating the allocation of capital charges to
                          business activities according to the level of risk-
                          taking;

                      -   conducting variance analysis against annual
                          budget or business targets, and calculating risk-
                          adjusted performance (see subsection 5.4
                          below);

                      -   providing adequate system support for fair
                          valuing exposures; and

                      -   conducting sensitivity analysis and stress-testing
                          (see subsection 5.5 below), and generating
                          forward-looking firm-wide scenario analyses on
                          evolving market conditions and stressed
                          conditions.

         5.2.3    Risk management reports should communicate
                  information in a clear and concise manner, but yet be


                                   29
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                       V.3 – 06.10.2017



                  comprehensive enough to be useful for informed
                  decision-making and risk assessment. Frequency,
                  timeliness, contents, granularity, distribution and level of
                  confidentiality of risk management reports should be
                  appropriate for the needs of recipients. While individual
                  AIs should determine risk reporting requirements that are
                  appropriate for their own business models and risk
                  profiles, at a minimum, the reports should cover all
                  material risk areas (e.g. credit, market, interest rate,
                  liquidity, operational, reputation, legal and strategic risks)
                  and provide information in respect of risk concentrations,
                  adherence to risk appetite and risk limits and forward-
                  looking assessment of risks. In addition, the risk
                  management reports should provide information relating
                  to regulatory ratios (e.g. capital adequacy ratios and
                  liquidity ratios) and their projections.

         5.2.4    There should be proper control, validation and
                  reconciliation processes in place to ensure the accuracy
                  of risk management reports, and relevant processes
                  should be documented with appropriate explanation. For
                  instance, it is expected that risk data aggregation should
                  occur on a largely automated basis. There should be
                  automated and manual checks, including validation rules
                  to help verify data inputs and calculations. Risk data and
                  reports should be reconciled with other relevant sources
                  (e.g. accounting data and reports) where appropriate.
                  The risk management reports should meet the accuracy
                  requirements set by the senior management for different
                  types of reporting (e.g. some data requires a high degree
                  of precision while a certain extent of approximation may
                  be allowed for information generated from models and
                  stress testing).

         5.2.5    To remain effective, there should be processes to
                  identify, rectify and alert the senior management (where
                  appropriate) of any incompleteness, exception, limitation
                  and weakness of the AI’s risk management information
                  system in capturing, aggregating and reporting of risks.
                  The system should also be subject to regular review and
                  enhancement. Moreover, the capabilities of the AI’s risk
                  management system should be considered by the Board
                  (or its Risk Committee) and senior management as part
                  of any approval process for new initiatives (e.g.

                                    30
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      development of new products and acquisition) and a
                      clear timeframe should be set for making any required
                      upgrading or adjustment.

       5.3   Risk measurement and assessment

             5.3.1    AIs should employ effective methodologies and tools for
                      the measurement of various types of quantifiable risk
                      and for the assessment of other risks which are not
                      easily quantifiable (e.g. reputation risk).

             5.3.2    Different methods or models may be used to assess or
                      measure each type of risk. In determining the methods or
                      models to be adopted for risk measurement or
                      assessment, an AI should, among other things, consider
                      the following factors:

                         the nature, scale and complexity of its business
                          activities;

                         its business needs (e.g. for pricing);

                         the assumptions underpinning the methods or
                          models;

                         data availability;

                         the sophistication of its management information
                          system; and

                         staff expertise.

             5.3.3    The Board or its designated committee(s) and senior
                      management should recognise the biases and
                      assumptions embedded in, and the constraints of, the
                      methods or models chosen (including associated
                      valuation and pricing methodologies) in order to better
                      assess the results generated from those methods or
                      models. They should also satisfy themselves as to the
                      adequacy and appropriateness of the key assumptions,
                      data sources and procedures used to measure or assess
                      the risks.




                                        31
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



         5.3.4    The accuracy and reliability of a risk measurement
                  method or model should be verified against the actual
                  results through regular back-testing. The measurement
                  method or model (including the underlying assumptions)
                  should also be subject to periodic update to reflect
                  changing market conditions.

         5.3.5    AIs should avoid over reliance on any specific risk
                  methodology or model. Modelling and risk management
                  techniques should always be tempered by expert
                  judgement. For example, models that project very high
                  returns on economic capital may arouse concern as to
                  whether this is in fact caused by a deficiency in the
                  models (such as failure to take into account all relevant
                  risks). Where practicable, AIs should use a range of risk
                  measures or tools to provide different views of risk on the
                  same exposures.

         5.3.6    Similarly, decisions which determine the level of risks to
                  be taken should not only be based on quantitative
                  information or model outputs, but should also take into
                  account the practical and conceptual limitations of the
                  methods and models adopted, using a qualitative
                  approach which includes expert judgement and critical
                  analysis. In addition, relevant macroeconomic trends and
                  data should explicitly be addressed to identify their
                  potential impact on particular business activities. Such
                  assessments should be formally integrated into material
                  risk decisions.

         5.3.7    AIs should use stress tests to complement risk
                  management models that are based on complex,
                  quantitative models using backward-looking data and
                  estimated statistical relationships. In particular, stress-
                  testing outcomes for a specific portfolio can provide
                  insights about the validity of statistical models at high
                  confidence intervals. However, AIs should recognise that
                  stress-testing results are highly dependent on the
                  limitations and assumptions of the scenarios used,
                  namely the severity and duration of the shock and the
                  underlying risks.

         5.3.8    For risk measurement purposes, AIs should be able to
                  value their positions (including those associated with

                                   32
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                       V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      complex products and financial instruments) based on
                      sound valuation practices. This should be the case both
                      in normal times and in times of stress. For exposures
                      that represent material risk, AIs should have the capacity
                      to produce valuations using alternative methods in the
                      event that primary inputs and approaches become
                      unreliable, unavailable or irrelevant due to market
                      disruptions or illiquidity.

       5.4   Risk-adjusted performance measurement

             5.4.1    AIs are expected to adopt a system for measuring the
                      performance of their business units on a risk-adjusted
                      basis to enable them to compare the financial
                      performance of individual business units, taking into
                      account the risks associated with their activities and any
                      breaches of risk limits or other risk management
                      measures. This ensures that business units are not
                      rewarded for taking on excessive risks.

             5.4.2    To enable efficient allocation of capital and other
                      financial resources to individual business units and to
                      provide these units with incentives for controlling the
                      risks generated from their activities, the performance
                      measurement system (including internal pricing
                      mechanisms) used by AIs should be able to
                      comprehensively measure the risks associated with the
                      units’ business activities. Management information
                      systems should be able to attribute risk and earnings to
                      their appropriate sources and to measure earnings
                      against capital allocated to the activity, after adjusting for
                      various risks (such as the expected loss on credit
                      facilities).

             5.4.3    Data inputs and information used for the purpose of
                      calculating remuneration payable to an AI’s senior
                      management and staff should be subject to independent
                      review to ensure their appropriateness and accuracy.

       5.5   Sensitivity analysis and stress-testing

             5.5.1    AIs should have adequate systems and capability to
                      measure the sensitivity of earnings to a change in



                                        33
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



                      individual risk factors (e.g. interest rates) and conduct
                      stress tests to:

                         identify possible events or market changes that could
                          have serious adverse effects or a significant impact
                          on their overall risk profiles and financial positions;

                         address existing or potential risk concentrations; and

                         facilitate the development of risk mitigating measures
                          or contingency plans across a range of stressed
                          conditions.

             5.5.2    The sensitivity analyses and stress tests should be
                      conducted regularly on major business activities, and on
                      a firm-wide basis. Stress scenarios should be
                      comprehensive and forward-looking, and include risk
                      factors that can significantly affect an AI or its individual
                      business units.

             5.5.3    The Board (or its Risk Committee) and senior
                      management should have direct involvement in setting
                      stress-testing objectives, defining stress scenarios,
                      discussing the results of sensitivity analyses and stress
                      tests, assessing potential actions and making relevant
                      decisions. The stress-testing outcomes should be taken
                      into account in the setting of policies and limits.

             5.5.4    See IC-5 “Stress-testing” for more guidance on the use
                      of stress tests for risk management purposes.

6.     Internal controls, audits and contingency planning
       6.1   Internal control system

             6.1.1    A critical element to support an effective risk
                      management framework is the existence of a sound
                      internal control system.

             6.1.2    A properly structured internal control system should:

                         help to promote effective and efficient operation;

                         provide reliable financial information;

                                        34
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017



                     safeguard assets;

                     minimise the operating risk of loss from irregularities,
                      fraud and errors;

                     ensure effective risk management systems; and

                     ensure compliance with relevant laws, regulations
                      and internal policies.

         6.1.3    An AI’s internal control system should, at a minimum,
                  cover the following:

                     high level controls, including clear delegation of
                      authority, written policies and procedures, separation
                      of   critical    functions    (e.g.  marketing,   risk
                      management, accounting, settlement, audit and
                      compliance);

                     controls relating to major functional areas, including,
                      retail banking, corporate banking, institutional
                      banking, private banking and treasury. Such controls
                      should include segregation of duties, authorization
                      and approval, limit monitoring, physical access
                      controls, etc.;

                     controls relating to financial accounting (e.g.
                      reconciliation of nostro accounts and review of
                      suspense accounts), annual budgeting, management
                      reporting and compilation of prudential returns to the
                      regulators;

                     controls relating to information technology (see
                      TM-G-1 “General Principles for Technology Risk
                      Management”);

                     controls relating to outsourced activities, where
                      applicable (see SA-2 “Outsourcing”); and

                     controls relating to compliance with statutory and
                      regulatory requirements (including but not limited to
                      those relating to anti-money laundering and counter-
                      terrorist financing).



                                   35
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                    Risk Management Framework                            V.3 – 06.10.2017



                6.1.4    An effective internal control system requires a strong
                         control environment 10 to which the Board and senior
                         management provide their full support, and an internal
                         audit function to evaluate its performance on a regular
                         basis (see subsection 6.2 below).

        6.2     Internal audit function

                6.2.1    AIs’ internal audit function (see also IC-2 “Internal Audit
                         Function”) should, among other things, perform
                         independent periodic checking on whether the risk
                         management framework approved by the Board is
                         properly implemented and the established policies and
                         control procedures in respect of risk management are
                         complied with.

                6.2.2    The effectiveness of an AI’s risk management processes
                         and related internal controls should be assessed and
                         tested periodically. The scope and frequency of audit
                         may vary but should be increased if there are significant
                         weaknesses or major changes or new products or
                         services are introduced.

                6.2.3    In fulfilling its responsibilities relating to an AI’s risk
                         management, the internal audit function should, among
                         other things, assess (on a group basis and on the basis
                         of individual business units and legal entities) and report
                         to the Board (or its Audit Committee) periodically
                         whether:

                             the AI’s risk governance arrangements and risk
                              appetite framework are effective, both in their design
                              and operation (including the linkages to the AI’s risk
                              culture,    strategic  and      business     planning,
                              remuneration and decision-making processes);

                             breaches of risk limits are being appropriately
                              identified, escalated and reported;



10
     “Control environment” means the overall attitude, awareness and actions of directors and
     management regarding the internal control system and its importance in the entity.



                                             36
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                 Risk Management Framework                      V.3 – 06.10.2017



                         the AI’s risk measurement techniques and risk
                          management information system and related
                          reporting are effective; and

                         the AI’s internal control system is effective.

             6.2.4    All material risk management deficiencies and
                      weaknesses (including any non-compliance with internal
                      policies and procedures as well as stipulated regulatory
                      requirements on risk management) identified should be
                      directly and promptly reported to the Board (or its Audit
                      Committee) and senior management for early
                      rectification.

             6.2.5    An AI should have in place appropriate arrangements
                      (such as periodic meetings) to facilitate effective
                      exchange of information between the Audit Committee
                      and Risk Committee, and to ensure that all material risks
                      and related risk management processes are subject to
                      independent assessment by the internal audit function.

       6.3   Compliance function

             6.3.1 The compliance function plays an important role with
                   respect to a sound risk management framework, but
                   should not be regarded as a substitute for regular and
                   adequate internal audit coverage. The work of the
                   compliance function should be subject to periodic reviews
                   by the internal audit function.

             6.3.2 The primary role of an AI’s compliance function is to
                   assist the AI to ensure compliance with the statutory
                   provisions, regulatory requirements and codes of conduct
                   applicable to its banking or other regulated activities. This
                   includes ensuring that the AI has appropriate internal
                   policies to achieve compliance. (For the avoidance of
                   doubt, the responsibility for achieving compliance does
                   not rest only with the compliance function but every




                                        37
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                      Risk Management Framework                                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                           function and staff of an AI have their respective
                           responsibility for ensuring compliance.)11

                  6.3.3 Key responsibilities of the compliance function include12:

                                identifying, assessing and monitoring compliance
                                 risk;

                                advising senior management on the laws, rules and
                                 standards (and any changes of such) with which the
                                 AI is required to comply;

                                establishing the AI’s compliance policies and
                                 guidelines, and ensuring that they remain effective;

                                providing compliance-related advice and training to
                                 staff;

                                reporting regularly to, and advising                            senior
                                 management on, compliance matters; and

                                establishing a compliance programme that sets out
                                 its planned activities, including the scope of review of
                                 policies and procedures to ensure the AI’s
                                 compliance with applicable statutory provisions,
                                 regulatory requirements and codes of conduct.

                  6.3.4 An AI is expected to have an independent compliance
                        function and to appoint a person (commonly known as
                        the Head of Compliance) to be responsible for the firm-
                        wide compliance function or, in the case of an overseas-
                        incorporated AI, the compliance function of its Hong Kong
                        branch. The appointment of the Head of Compliance
                        should be approved by the Board (or its designated
                        committee). An AI should promptly and in any event


11
     AIs should note that non-compliance with other areas not directly related to banking or regulated
     activities (e.g. breach of labour or company laws) could also give rise to legal or regulatory
     sanctions, material financial loss, or loss of reputation. If not the AI’s compliance function, there
     should be other parties, such as the AI’s legal function, responsible for providing advice on, or
     monitoring the legal implications associated with, such areas.
12
     If some of these responsibilities (e.g. legal advice on laws, rules and standards) are carried out by
     staff in other functions, the allocation of responsibilities to each function should be clear.



                                                   38
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                      Risk Management Framework                                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                           within 14 days, notify the HKMA of the appointment (and
                           cessation of appointment) of its Head of Compliance.13

                  6.3.5 In exceptional cases where, for example, an AI’s scale of
                        operations may not justify having all necessary tasks
                        carried out internally by the compliance function, other
                        arrangements (such as hiring an external lawyer to
                        provide legal advice on a need basis or an appropriate
                        allocation of duties among functions) may be acceptable.
                        In any case, where certain tasks of the compliance
                        function are outsourced, there should nevertheless be
                        adequate oversight by the AI’s Head of Compliance.

                  6.3.6     An effective compliance function should:

                                have adequate resources and be staffed by an
                                 appropriate number of competent staff who are
                                 sufficiently independent of the business and
                                 operating units. The Head of Compliance and the
                                 staff of the compliance function should not be placed
                                 in a position where there is a possible conflict of
                                 interest between their compliance responsibilities
                                 and any other responsibilities they may have; 14

                                be given appropriate standing and authority within
                                 the AI. It should report to a designated committee of
                                 the Board (e.g. the Audit Committee) or senior
                                 management and have the right to report matters to
                                 the Board directly as necessary; and

                                be able to carry out its duties on its own initiative in
                                 all business and operating units of the AI in which
                                 compliance risk exists, with unfettered access to any
                                 records or files necessary to enable it to conduct its
                                 work.



13
     This notification requirement is applicable irrespective of whether the person appointed as the Head
     of Compliance is a “manager” as defined in section 2 of the Banking Ordinance.
14
     For instance, among other things, the Head of Compliance should not have responsibilities for any
     business units of the AI. Remuneration of the Head of Compliance and staff of the compliance
     function should not be influenced by, or linked to the performance of, the business and operational
     units which are subject to monitoring by the compliance function.



                                                   39
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1                     Risk Management Framework                                    V.3 – 06.10.2017



                 6.3.7      To ensure effective management of compliance risk, the
                            AI’s compliance policy should document the
                            organisation, status and responsibilities of the
                            compliance function as well as other measures to
                            manage compliance risk. The Board should approve the
                            policy and should oversee the implementation of the
                            policy by senior management (with the assistance of the
                            compliance function) through regular review of the
                            extent to which the policy is observed. The Board may
                            designate an appropriate Board-level committee to
                            review and approve the compliance policy and conduct
                            regular reviews of how the policy is being implemented.
                            In such a case, the designated committee (e.g. the Audit
                            Committee) should have the required independence to
                            take up the mandate. The Board should monitor the
                            committee’s performance to ensure that its directives are
                            properly followed.15

        6.4      Contingency, business continuity and recovery planning

                 6.4.1     Each AI should, as part of its business continuity
                           planning, contingency funding planning and recovery
                           planning, ensure that the AI’s risk management function
                           will be able to fulfil its roles and responsibilities
                           effectively in emergency and crisis situations.




15
     In the case of a foreign bank operating a branch in Hong Kong, the head office of the bank may
     authorize the branch to establish the compliance policy for the local operations, provided that the
     policy is approved by the head office before it is implemented and there is a process for the head
     office to oversee how the policy has been implemented.



                                                  40
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1             Risk Management Framework                   V.3 – 06.10.2017



                                                                  Annex 1


        Examples of significant changes in features or risk profile
                        of products and services


A. Treasury-related

  Feature
                   Original             New                Reason
  changed
Product       1. European call   1. European call   The risk profiles (e.g.
feature(s)       option on          option on       liquidity risk, market
                 index              single stocks   risk, regulatory risk,
              2. Treasuries up   2. Treasuries up   etc.) of the products
                 to 5 year tenor    to 30 year      have           changed
              3. Trading of off-    tenor           significantly.
                 shore Korean 3. Trading of on-
                 Won                shore Korean
              4. European           Won
                 option on HSI 4. American
                                    option on HSI

Hedging       Fully    back-to- Market       risks Risk    profile     has
strategy      back     to   an warehoused          changed significantly.
              interbank         under limits
              counterparty


Role      of Stock dealing in Prop-trading          Role      of    service
service      primary market   stocks                provision has changed,
provision                                           impacting approach to
                                                    risk management




                                   41
Supervisory Policy Manual
IC-1               Risk Management Framework                     V.3 – 06.10.2017




B. Others

   Product re-launch after a substantially long lapse (e.g. market conditions
    or regulatory requirements have changed)
   Product pass-through to customers versus position taking by AIs
    themselves
   Change in markets (e.g. different geographical locations involving
    different legal or regulatory requirements, and different liquidity and
    volatility risks)
   Change in distribution channel (e.g. mobile banking and internet banking)
   Change in counterparty or customer segment targeted by the product (e.g.
    from interbank counterparty or large institutional clients to high net worth
    individuals or retail customers, who may not possess the same level of
    expertise to assess the risks and returns of the same products)
   Change in currency denomination of an existing product
   Change in market positioning (e.g. end user, active player and market
    maker)
   Change in platform (e.g. over-the-counter, exchange and electronic)
   Change in process (e.g. automation)
   Change in booking arrangement (e.g. from held-to-maturity to trading)
   Change in settlement methodology (e.g. from physical delivery to cash
    settlement)
   Major changes in documentation including legal documents (e.g.
    margining requirement and netting arrangements)


                             —————————


    Contents            Glossary             Home             Introduction




                                      42
