                       SID – SLOVENSKA IZVOZNA IN RAZVOJNA BANKA, D.D., LJUBLJANA

                                           EUR 350,000,000 3.00 per cent. Notes due 2015

                                        (to be consolidated and form a single series with the

                                           EUR 750,000,000 3.00 per cent. Notes due 2015

                                                         issued on 21 April 2010)

                                                             guaranteed by
                                                        The Republic of Slovenia

The issue price of the EUR 350,000,000 3.00 per cent. Notes due 2015 (the "New Notes") of SID – Slovenska izvozna in razvojna banka,
d.d., Ljubljana (the "Issuer") is 96.675 per cent. of their principal amount (plus 324 days' accrued interest in respect of the period from, and
including, 21 April 2010, to, but excluding, 11 March 2011). The New Notes will be consolidated and form a single series with the EUR
750,000,000 3.00 per cent. Notes due 2015 issued on 21 April 2010 (the "Original Notes" and together with the New Notes, the "Notes")
upon exchange of interests in the New Temporary Global Note for interests in the New Permanent Global Note (each as defined below).
Upon consolidation the aggregate principal amount of the Notes will total EUR 1,100,000,000.

Unless previously redeemed or cancelled, the New Notes will be redeemed at their principal amount on 21 April 2015. The New Notes are
subject to redemption in whole at their principal amount at the option of the Issuer at any time in the event of certain changes affecting
taxation in the Republic of Slovenia; see "Terms and Conditions of the Notes—Redemption and Purchase".

The New Notes will bear interest from 21 April 2010 at the rate of 3.00 per cent. per annum payable annually in arrear on 21 April each year
commencing on 21 April 2011. Payments on the New Notes will be made in Euro without deduction for or on account of taxes imposed or
levied by the Republic of Slovenia to the extent described under "Terms and Conditions of the Notes—Taxation". The payment obligations of
the Issuer in respect of the New Notes are unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by the Republic of Slovenia (the "Guarantor").

Application has been made to list the New Notes on the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and to trade them on the
Luxembourg Stock Exchange's regulated market, which is a regulated market for the purposes of Article 4.1.14 of the directive on markets in
financial instruments (Directive 2004/39/EC). This Information Memorandum constitutes a simplified prospectus pursuant to Chapter 2 of
Part III of the Luxembourg law on prospectuses for securities (loi relative aux prospectus pour valeurs mobilières) dated 10 July 2005 (the
"Luxembourg Prospectus Law")

The New Notes have not been, and will not be, registered under the United States Securities Act of 1933, as amended (the "Securities Act")
and are subject to United States tax law requirements. The New Notes are being offered outside the United States by the Managers (as
defined in "Subscription and Sale") in accordance with Regulation S under the Securities Act ("Regulation S"), and may not be offered, sold
or delivered within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons except pursuant to an exemption from, or in a
transaction not subject to, the registration requirements of the Securities Act.

Investing in the New Notes involves certain risks. The principal risk factors that may affect the abilities of the Issuer to fulfil its
obligations under the New Notes are discussed under "Risk Factors" below.

The New Notes, on issue, will be rated Aa2 by Moody's Investors Service, Inc. ("Moody's"). A rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or
hold securities and may be subject to revision, suspension or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating organisation.

The New Notes will be in bearer form and in the denomination of EUR 50,000 and integral multiples of EUR 1,000 in excess thereof up to
and including EUR 99,000. The New Notes will initially be in the form of a temporary global note (the "New Temporary Global Note"),
without interest coupons, which will be deposited on or around 11 March 2011 (the "Closing Date") with a common safekeeper for
Euroclear Bank, S.A./N.V. ("Euroclear") and Clearstream Banking, société anonyme, Luxembourg ("Clearstream, Luxembourg"). The
New Temporary Global Note will be exchangeable, in whole or in part, for interests in a permanent global note (the "New Permanent
Global Note"), without interest coupons, not earlier than 40 days after the Closing Date upon certification as to non-U.S. beneficial
ownership. Interest payments in respect of the New Notes cannot be collected without such certification of non-U.S. beneficial ownership.
The New Permanent Global Note will be exchangeable in certain limited circumstances in whole, but not in part, for Notes in definitive form
("Definitive Notes") in the denomination of EUR 50,000 and integral multiples of EUR 1,000 in excess thereof up to and including EUR
99,000 and with interest coupons attached. See "Summary of Provisions Relating to the New Notes in Global Form".

                                                           Joint Lead Managers
          DEUTSCHE BANK                                             HSBC                                   UNICREDIT BANKA
                                                               Co-Managers
                     ABANKA VIPA D.D.                                                          BERENBERG BANK
                          DZ BANK AG                                                              ERSTE GROUP
                                                                 NLB, D.D.
                                                             9 MARCH 2011




                                                                     -i-
                                                                     CONTENTS

                                                                                                                                                       Page

IMPORTANT NOTICES ................................................................................................................................ 1
INFORMATION INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE .............................................................................. 3
RISK FACTORS ............................................................................................................................................. 4
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES ........................................................................................... 9
SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE NEW NOTES IN GLOBAL FORM .................. 17
USE OF PROCEEDS .................................................................................................................................... 19
DESCRIPTION OF THE ISSUER ............................................................................................................... 20
SELECTED FINANCIAL INFORMATION .............................................................................................. 37
TAXATION ................................................................................................................................................... 39
SUBSCRIPTION AND SALE ...................................................................................................................... 43
GENERAL INFORMATION ....................................................................................................................... 45
                                        IMPORTANT NOTICES

The Issuer accepts responsibility for the information contained in this Information Memorandum and
declares that, having taken all reasonable care to ensure that such is the case, the information contained in
this Information Memorandum to the best of its knowledge is in accordance with the facts and contains no
omission likely to affect its import.

Save for the Issuer, no person has authorised the whole or any part of this Information Memorandum and
accordingly no representation, warranty or undertaking, express or implied, is made and no responsibility
or liability is accepted by Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, HSBC France, UniCredit Banka Slovenija
d.d., Abanka Vipa d.d., DZ BANK AG Deutsche Zentral-Genossenschaftsbank, Frankfurt am Main, Erste
Group Bank AG, Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG and Nova Ljubljanska banka, d.d., Ljubljana (the
"Managers") as to the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in this Information
Memorandum or any other information provided by the Issuer in connection with the New Notes or their
distribution. The Managers accept no liability in relation to information contained or incorporated by
reference in this Information Memorandum or any other information provided by the Issuer in connection
with the offering of the New Notes or their distribution.

The Issuer has confirmed to the Managers that this Information Memorandum contains all information
which is (in the context of the issue, offering and sale of the New Notes) material; such information is
true and accurate in all material respects and is not misleading in any material respect; any opinions,
predictions or intentions expressed in this Information Memorandum on the part of the Issuer are honestly
held or made and are not misleading in any material respect; this Information Memorandum does not omit
to state any material fact necessary to make such information, opinions, predictions or intentions (in the
context of the issue, offering and the sale of the New Notes) not misleading in any material respect; and
all reasonable enquiries have been made to ascertain or verify the foregoing.

The Issuer has not authorised the making or provision of any representation or information regarding the
Issuer or the New Notes other than as contained in this Information Memorandum or as approved for such
purpose by the Issuer. Any such representation or information should not be relied upon as having been
authorised by the Issuer or the Managers.

The Republic of Slovenia has neither reviewed this Information Memorandum nor verified the
information contained in it, and the Republic of Slovenia makes no representation with respect to, and
does not accept any responsibility for, the contents of this Information Memorandum or any other
statements made or purported to be made on its behalf in connection with the Issuer or the offering of the
New Notes. The Republic of Slovenia accordingly disclaims all and any liability whether arising in tort
or contract or otherwise, which it might otherwise have in respect of this Information Memorandum or
any such statement.

The Managers expressly do not undertake to review the financial condition or affairs of the Issuer during
the life of the New Notes or to advise any investor in the New Notes of any information coming to their
attention.

Neither this Information Memorandum nor any other information supplied in connection with the New
Notes (i) is intended to provide the basis of any credit or other evaluation or (ii) should be considered as a
recommendation or constituting an invitation or offer by the Issuer that any recipient of this Information
Memorandum should purchase any New Notes. Each investor contemplating purchasing any New Notes
should make its own independent investigation of the financial condition and affairs and its own appraisal
of the creditworthiness of the Issuer.

Neither the delivery of this Information Memorandum nor the offering, sale or delivery of any New Note
shall in any circumstances create any implication that there has been no adverse change, or any event
reasonably likely to involve any adverse change, in the condition (financial or otherwise) of the Issuer
since the date of this Information Memorandum or the date upon which this Information Memorandum
has been most recently amended or supplemented or that any other information supplied in connection
with the New Notes is correct as of any time subsequent to the date on which it is supplied or, if different,
the date indicated in the document containing the same.

This Information Memorandum does not constitute an offer of, or an invitation to subscribe for or
purchase, any New Notes.




                                                    -1-
The distribution of this Information Memorandum and the offering, sale and delivery of New Notes in
certain jurisdictions may be restricted by law. The Issuer and the Managers do not represent that this
document may be lawfully distributed or that the New Notes may be lawfully offered, in compliance with
any applicable registration or other requirements in any such jurisdiction, or pursuant to an exemption
available thereunder, or assume any responsibility for facilitating any such distribution or offering. In
particular, no action has been taken by the Issuer or the Managers which would permit a public offering
of the New Notes or distribution of this document in any jurisdiction where action for that purpose is
required. Accordingly, the New Notes may not be offered or sold, directly or indirectly, and neither this
Information Memorandum nor any advertisement or other offering material may be distributed or
published, in any jurisdiction except under circumstances that will result in compliance with any
applicable laws and regulations. Persons into whose possession this Information Memorandum comes are
required by the Issuer and the Managers to inform themselves about and to observe any such restrictions.
For a description of certain restrictions on offers, sales and deliveries of New Notes and on distribution of
this Information Memorandum and other offering material relating to the New Notes, see "Subscription
and Sale".

In particular there are restrictions on the distribution of this Information Memorandum and the offer or
sale of New Notes in the United States and the United Kingdom.

The New Notes have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act and are subject to
United States tax law requirements. Subject to certain exceptions, New Notes may not be offered, sold or
delivered within the United States or to U.S. persons.

This Information Memorandum does not constitute a prospectus pursuant to Directive 2003/71/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 4 November 2003 (the "Prospectus Directive").
Accordingly, this Information Memorandum does not purport to meet the format and the disclosure
requirements of the Prospectus Directive and Commission Regulation (EC) No. 809/2004 implementing
the Prospectus Directive, and it has not been, and will not be, submitted for approval to any competent
authority within the meaning of the Prospectus Directive and in particular the Supervisory Commission of
the Financial Sector (Commission de Surveillance du Secteur Financier), in its capacity as competent
authority under the Luxembourg Prospectus Law. The New Notes, issued pursuant to this Information
Memorandum, will therefore not qualify for the benefit of the single European passport pursuant to the
Prospectus Directive.

In this Information Memorandum, unless otherwise specified, references to a "Member State" are
references to a Member State of the European Economic Area, references to "U.S. $", "U.S. dollars" or
"dollars" are to United States dollars and references to "€", "EUR" or "Euro" are to the single currency
introduced at the start of the third stage of the European Economic and Monetary Union pursuant to the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (as amended from time to time).

Certain figures included in this Information Memorandum have been subject to rounding adjustments;
accordingly, figures shown for the same category presented in different tables may vary slightly and
figures shown as totals in certain tables may not be an arithmetic aggregation of the figures which
precede them.

In connection with the issue of the New Notes, Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft (the "Stabilising
Manager") (or persons acting on behalf of the Stabilising Manager) may over allot New Notes or
effect transactions with a view to supporting the market price of the New Notes at a level higher
than that which might otherwise prevail. However, there is no assurance that the Stabilising
Manager (or persons acting on behalf of a Stabilising Manager) will undertake stabilisation action.
Any stabilisation action may begin on or after the date on which adequate public disclosure of the
terms of the offer of the New Notes is made and, if begun, may be ended at any time, but it must
end no later than the earlier of 30 days after the issue date of the New Notes and 60 days after the
date of the allotment of the New Notes. Any stabilisation action or over-allotment must be
conducted by the Stabilising Manager (or persons acting on behalf of the Stabilising Manager) in
accordance with all applicable laws and rules.




                                                   -2-
                                  INFORMATION INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE

The information set out in the table below shall be deemed to be incorporated in, and to form part of, this
Information Memorandum provided however that any statement contained in any document incorporated
by reference in, and forming part of, this Information Memorandum shall be deemed to be modified or
superseded for the purpose of this Information Memorandum to the extent that a statement contained in
this Information Memorandum modifies or supersedes such statement contained in a document
incorporated by reference.

Such documents will be made available, free of charge, during usual business hours at the specified
offices of the Fiscal Agent and the Listing Agent in Luxembourg, unless such documents have been
modified or superseded. Such documents will also be available to view on the website of the Luxembourg
Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu).

For ease of reference, the tables below set out the relevant page references for (a) the consolidated and
non-consolidated audited financial statements, the notes to the consolidated and non-consolidated audited
financial statements and the Auditors' reports for the years ended 31 December 2008 and 2009 for the
Issuer, as set out in the respective annual reports; and (b) the consolidated and non-consolidated
unaudited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010. Prospective investors should note
that the financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010 have not been audited, but are to be
audited, and as such may be subject to change. Any information not listed in the cross-reference table but
included in the documents incorporated by reference is given for information purposes only.

Consolidated and                 Non-Consolidated                Audited         Financial          Statements           for     the      year      ended
31 December 2008

Auditors Report..................................................................................................................................... Page 55
Balance sheet ........................................................................................................................................ Page 57
Income statement .................................................................................................................................. Page 59
Cash flow statement .............................................................................................................................. Page 60
Notes to Financial Statements ................................................................................................... Page 65 to 120


Consolidated and                 Non-Consolidated                Audited         Financial          Statements           for     the      year      ended
31 December 2009

Auditors Report..................................................................................................................................... Page 58
Balance sheet ........................................................................................................................................ Page 60
Income statement .................................................................................................................................. Page 61
Cash flow statement .............................................................................................................................. Page 62
Notes to Financial Statements ................................................................................................... Page 67 to 108


Consolidated and Non-Consolidated Unaudited Financial Statements for the year ended
31 December 2010

Non-Consolidated Unaudited Balance sheet for the Issuer ................................................................... Page 5
Non-Consolidated Unaudited Income statement for the Issuer ............................................................. Page 6
Consolidated Unaudited Balance sheet for Sid Bank Group ................................................................. Page 8
Consolidated Unaudited Income statement for Sid Bank Group........................................................... Page 9




                                                                           -3-
                                             RISK FACTORS

Words and expressions defined in the "Terms and Conditions of the Notes" below or elsewhere in this
Information Memorandum have the same meanings in this section.

The Issuer believes that the following factors may affect its ability to fulfil its obligations under the New
Notes. These factors are contingencies that may or may not occur and the Issuer is not in a position to
express a view on the likelihood of any such contingency occurring. Factors (although not exhaustive)
which the Issuer believes could be material for the purpose of assessing the market risks associated with
the New Notes are described below.

The Issuer believes that the factors described below represent the principal risks inherent in investing in
the New Notes, but the Issuer does not represent that the statements below regarding the risks of holding
any New Notes are exhaustive. Prospective investors should also read the detailed information set out
elsewhere in this Information Memorandum and reach their own views prior to making any investment
decision.

Before making an investment decision with respect to the New Notes, prospective investors should consult
their own stockbroker, bank manager, lawyer, accountant or other financial, legal and tax advisers and
carefully review the risks entailed by an investment in the New Notes and consider such an investment
decision in the light of the prospective investor's personal circumstances.

Risks relating to the Issuer

Risks associated with the Issuer's risk-management systems

In its risk management practises the Issuer observes: its public character; the breakdown of its business
operations into transactions involving the Issuer's own assets; any given mandates for promotional and
development financial services according to the Slovenian Export and Development Bank Act (Zakon o
Slovenski izvozni in razvojni banki (ZSIRB), Uradni list RS, Nos 56/2008 and 20/2009) (the "Act"); and
any activities performed for the account of the Republic of Slovenia, including the management of
contingency reserves.

A comprehensive process of assessing the adequacy of internal capital, adapted to the risks assumed,
ensures that the risks assumed remain within the limits of the Issuer’s capacity to assume risks.

The Issuer manages and mitigates market price risks (interest rate risk and foreign currency risk),
liquidity risks and operational risks by minimising exposures to these risks and using hedging instruments
(e.g. forward contracts, interest rate swaps) if necessary.

Due to its activities in export financing and its activities as a development bank, the Issuer faces
potentially higher credit risks, which are more likely to be affected by the economic slowdown. Under its
risk management strategy and capital risk and capital management policy, the Issuer established an
appropriate process of assessing the adequacy of its internal capital in which additional capital
requirements for concentration risk, according to sector and the geographic location of the debtor's
country, is added.

In the internal capital adequacy assessment, capital requirements for credit risks hold a 81 per cent. share,
followed by a 2 per cent. share for operational risks, and 17 per cent. for strategic risk, concentration risk,
interest rate risk and external factors combined.

The Issuer is exposed to credit risk

The Issuer manages credit risk in a relatively conservative manner based on an individual client's long
term credit assessment as well as on an overall credit portfolio assessment. During the ongoing financial
turmoil the Issuer seeks to proactively monitor individual clients and if needed requires additional
collateral, while at the same time ascertains any additional impairments. The changed macroeconomic
environment in the Republic of Slovenia as well as in the EU may have an adverse impact on the Issuer's
credit portfolio expressed by a lower internal rating, a higher level of non-performing loans and a
decrease in the value of collateral. Accordingly, the Issuer's business and financial condition could be
affected. The Issuer's credit exposure to the Slovenian banking sector represents 78.8 per cent. of its
credit portfolio.




                                                    -4-
The Issuer manages liquidity risk

The Issuer does not accept short term or sight deposits, it is therefore not exposed to liquidity risk in the
conventional sense. The Issuer is comfortable with regard to the regulatory requirements (restrictive
liquidity ratio, daily reporting etc.) imposed upon it. Nevertheless, problems could occur should the Issuer
be unable to draw on the funds promised. If circumstances warrant, the Issuer follows a stress test
scenario.

The Issuer is subject to operational risk

The main factors affecting operational risk are human resources, business processes, information
technology and other infrastructure, organisational structure and external events. The management of
operational risk is based on the established system of internal controls, the decision-making and
authorisation policies, appropriate substitution for absent workers, suitable staff qualifications and
investments in information technology. System risks inherent in information technology are increasing in
line with the level of computerisation and they were managed through additional measures, such as the
establishment of a business continuity plan and other measures aimed at increasing information security.
It is worth noting that the Issuer does not provide payment services for its clients, e-banking products
and/or similar products where realisation of operational risk also represents a threat for the reputation and
potential losses for indemnification of clients.

Risk relating to the New Notes

A finding by the EU Commission in respect of the Guarantee may affect its validity

The payment obligations of the Issuer under the Notes are guaranteed by the Guarantor pursuant to
Article 13 of the Act. The preliminary and informal view of the European Commission, as communicated
to the Guarantor in a letter dated 11 December 2009, was that, subject to compliance with certain
conditions, the Guarantee does not involve state aid. The EU Commission is expected to deliver further
views on this matter in the first half of 2011. There is a risk that, if the European Commission were to
change its preliminary view in any subsequent determination, or if the conditions set out in the letter
dated 11 December 2009 were not complied with, the European Commission may find the Guarantee to
involve state aid. Such a finding could have an impact on the validity and enforceability of the
Guarantee.

If the Notes will not be, or will cease to be, admitted to trading on a regulated market or a multilateral
trading facility in either an EU member state or an OECD member state, the interest under the Notes
shall be subject to Slovenian withholding tax

If and for as long as the Notes are admitted to trading on a regulated market or a multilateral trading
facility in either an EU member state or an OECD member state, the amounts of interest payable under
the Notes will be fully exempt from Slovenian withholding tax.

If, however, at the time when an amount of interest under the Notes is paid, the Notes are not admitted to
trading on a regulated market or a multilateral trading facility in either an EU member state or an OECD
member state, then the Issuer will be obliged to deduct withholding tax on payments of interest under the
Notes. In circumstances where an amount of interest is paid by the Issuer to a person (including any
paying agent) who receives such amount for a third party's account, the Issuer will be required to deduct
withholding tax at a rate of 20 per cent.

If the interest payable under the Notes becomes subject to Slovenian withholding tax, Condition 6
(Taxation) will apply, according to which the Issuer shall pay such additional amounts as will result in
receipt by Noteholders and Couponholders after such withholding or deduction of such amounts as would
have been received by them had no such withholding or deduction been required.

Noteholders and Couponholders should note that Condition 6 (Taxation) further provides that the
obligation on the Issuer to pay such additional amounts is subject to certain exceptions, including, among
others, where the withholding or deduction of taxes, duties, assessments or governmental charges is
imposed on a payment to or for (i) a person resident for taxation purposes in a non-EU jurisdiction where
the general or average nominal income tax rate is lower than 12.5 per cent. or (ii) an individual resident
for taxation purposes in a non-EU jurisdiction. Accordingly, certain holders of Notes or Coupons may




                                                   -5-
not receive amounts of principal or interest equal to the respective amounts which would otherwise have
been receivable in respect of the Notes or Coupons in the absence of such withholding or deduction.

The Notes may be redeemed prior to maturity

In the event that the Issuer would be obliged to pay additional amounts as provided for or referred to in
Condition 6 (Taxation) as a result of certain changes in, or amendment to, the laws or regulations of the
Republic of Slovenia or any political subdivision thereof or any authority therein or thereof having power
to tax, the Issuer may redeem all outstanding Notes in accordance with the Conditions.

Because the Global Notes are held by or on behalf of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg,
investors will have to rely on their procedures for transfer, payment and communication with the
Issuer

The New Notes will be represented by the New Temporary Global Note or the New Permanent Global
Note (together the "Global Notes") except in certain limited circumstances described in the New
Permanent Global Note. The Global Notes will be deposited with a common safekeeper for Euroclear
and Clearstream, Luxembourg. Except in certain limited circumstances described in the New Permanent
Global Note, investors will not be entitled to receive definitive Notes. Euroclear and Clearstream,
Luxembourg will maintain records of the beneficial interests in the Global Notes. While the New Notes
are represented by the Global Notes, investors will be able to trade their beneficial interests only through
Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.

The Issuer will discharge its payment obligations under the New Notes by making payments to or to the
order of the common safekeeper for Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg for distribution to their
account holders. A holder of a beneficial interest in a Global Note must rely on the procedures of
Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to receive payments under the New Notes. The Issuer has no
responsibility or liability for the records relating to, or payments made in respect of, beneficial interests in
the Global Notes.

Holders of beneficial interests in the Global Notes will not have a direct right to vote in respect of the
New Notes. Instead, such holders will be permitted to act only to the extent that they are enabled by
Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg to appoint appropriate proxies. Similarly, holders of beneficial
interests in the Global Notes will not have a direct right under the Global Notes to take enforcement
action against the Issuer in the event of a default under the New Notes but will have to rely upon their
rights under the New Deed of Covenant.

Minimum denomination

As the Notes have a denomination consisting of the minimum denomination of EUR 50,000 and integral
multiples of EUR 1,000 in excess thereof up to and including EUR 99,000, it is possible that the Notes
may be traded in amounts in excess of EUR 50,000 (or its equivalent) that are not integral multiples of
EUR 50,000 (or its equivalent). In such case a Noteholder who, as a result of trading such amounts, holds
a principal amount of less than the minimum denomination may not receive a Definitive Note in respect
of such holding (should Definitive Notes be printed) and would need to purchase a principal amount of
Notes such that its holding amounts to the minimum denomination.

If Definitive Notes are issued, Noteholders should be aware that Definitive Notes which have a
denomination that is not an integral multiple of EUR 50,000 (or its equivalent) may be illiquid and
difficult to trade.

The New Notes may not be a suitable investment for all investors

Each potential investor in the New Notes must determine the suitability of that investment in light of its
own circumstances. In particular, each potential investor should:

(i)     have sufficient knowledge and experience to make a meaningful evaluation of the New Notes,
        the merits and risks of investing in the New Notes and the information contained or incorporated
        by reference in this Information Memorandum or any applicable supplement;




                                                     -6-
(ii)     have access to, and knowledge of, appropriate analytical tools to evaluate, in the context of its
         particular financial situation, an investment in the New Notes and the impact the New Notes will
         have on its overall investment portfolio;

(iii)    have sufficient financial resources and liquidity to bear all of the risks of an investment in the
         New Notes, including where the currency for principal or interest payments is different from the
         potential investor's currency;

(iv)     understand thoroughly the terms of the New Notes and be familiar with the behaviour of any
         relevant financial markets; and

(v)      be able to evaluate (either alone or with the help of a financial adviser) possible scenarios for
         economic, interest rate and other factors that may affect its investment and its ability to bear the
         applicable risks.

Modification and waivers

The conditions of the Notes contain provisions for calling meetings of Noteholders to consider matters
affecting their interests generally. These provisions permit defined majorities to bind all Noteholders
including Noteholders who did not attend and vote at the relevant meeting and Noteholders who voted in
a manner contrary to the majority.

The conditions of the Notes also provide that the Notes and the Conditions may be amended without the
consent of the Noteholders or the Couponholders to correct a manifest error. In addition, the parties to the
Fiscal Agency Agreement may agree to modify any provision thereof, but the Issuer shall not agree,
without the consent of the Noteholders, to any such modification unless it is of a formal, minor or
technical nature, it is made to correct a manifest error or it is, in the opinion of such parties, not materially
prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders.

EU Savings Directive

Under EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC on the taxation of savings income, each Member State is
required to provide to the tax authorities of another Member State details of payments of interest or other
similar income paid by a person within its jurisdiction to, or collected by such a person for, an individual
resident or certain limited types of entity established in that other Member State; however, for a
transitional period, Austria and Luxembourg may instead apply a withholding system in relation to such
payments, deducting tax at rates rising over time to 35 per cent. The transitional period is to terminate at
the end of the first full fiscal year following agreement by certain non-EU countries to the exchange of
information relating to such payments.

A number of non-EU countries including Switzerland, and certain dependent or associated territories of
certain Member States, have adopted similar measures (either provision of information or transitional
withholding) in relation to payments made by a person within its jurisdiction to, or collected by such a
person for, an individual resident or certain limited types of entity established in a Member State. In
addition, the Member States have entered into provision of information or transitional withholding
arrangements with certain of those dependent or associated territories in relation to payments made by a
person in a Member State to, or collected by such a person for, an individual resident or certain limited
types of entity established in one of those territories.

The European Commission has proposed certain amendments to the Directive, which included a number
of suggested changes which, if implemented, would amend or broaden the scope of the requirements
described above. Investors who are in any doubt as to their position should consult their professional
advisers.

Change of law

The conditions of the Notes are based on English law in effect as at the date of this Information
Memorandum. No assurance can be given as to the impact of any possible judicial decision or change to
English law or administrative practice after the date of this Information Memorandum.




                                                     -7-
Risks relating to the market generally

There is no active trading market for the New Notes

The New Notes are new securities which may not be widely distributed and for which there is currently
no active trading market. If the New Notes are traded after their initial issuance, they may trade at a
discount to their initial offering price, depending upon prevailing interest rates, the market for similar
securities, general economic conditions and the financial condition of the Issuer. The New Notes
constitute a further issue of securities by the Issuer which will, upon exchange of the New Temporary
Global Note for the New Permanent Global Note, be consolidated and form a single series with the
Original Notes. Although application has been made for the New Notes to be admitted to listing on the
Official List of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and trading on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange's
regulated market, there is no assurance that such application will be accepted or that an active trading
market will develop. Accordingly, there is no assurance as to the development or liquidity of any trading
market for the New Notes.

Legal investment considerations may restrict certain investments

The investment activities of certain investors are subject to legal investment laws and regulations, or
review or regulation by certain authorities. Each potential investor should consult its legal advisers to
determine whether and to what extent (1) the New Notes are legal investments for it, (2) the New Notes
can be used as collateral for various types of borrowing and (3) other restrictions apply to its purchase or
pledge of the New Notes. Financial institutions should consult their legal advisors or the appropriate
regulators to determine the appropriate treatment of the New Notes under any applicable risk-based
capital or similar rules.

Exchange rate risks and exchange controls

The Issuer will pay principal and interest on the New Notes in Euro. This presents certain risks relating
to currency conversions if an investor's financial activities are denominated principally in a currency or
currency unit (the "Investor's Currency") other than the Euro. These include the risk that exchange rates
may change significantly (including changes due to devaluation of the Euro or revaluation of the
Investor's Currency) and the risk that authorities with jurisdiction over the Investor's Currency may
impose or modify exchange controls. An appreciation in the value of the Investor's Currency relative to
Euro would decrease (i) the Investor's Currency-equivalent yield on the New Notes, (ii) the Investor's
Currency-equivalent value of the principal payable on the Notes and (iii) the Investor's Currency-
equivalent market value of the New Notes.

Government and monetary authorities may impose (as some have done in the past) exchange controls that
could adversely affect an applicable exchange rate. As a result, investors may receive less interest or
principal than expected, or no interest or principal.

Interest rate risks

Investment in the New Notes involves the risk that subsequent changes in market interest rates may
adversely affect the value of the New Notes.

Credit rating

The New Notes, on issue, will be rated Aa2 by Moody's Investors Service, Inc. A security rating is not a
recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to suspension, reduction or withdrawal
at any time by the assigning rating agency. Any adverse change in an applicable credit rating could
adversely affect the trading price for the New Notes.

Financial statements of the Issuer for its financial year ended 31 December 2010

The financial statements and figures of the Issuer for its financial year ended 31 December 2010
incorporated or contained in this Information Memorandum have not been audited. They are, however, in
the process of being audited and may be subject to amendment or adjustment.




                                                   -8-
                           TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF THE NOTES

The following is the text of the Terms and Conditions of the New Notes which, upon issue, will be the
Terms and Conditions applicable to all Notes (including the Original Notes) and (subject to completion
and amendment) will be endorsed on each Note in definitive form:

The EUR 350,000,000 3.00 per cent. Guaranteed Notes due 2015 (the "New Notes") of SID-Slovenska
izvozna in razvojna banka, d.d., Ljubljana (the "Issuer") will, pursuant to Condition 12 (Further Issues),
upon exchange of the temporary global note initially representing the New Notes on issue for the
permanent global note then to represent the New Notes (which is expected to be 20 April 2011, upon
certification as to non-U.S. beneficial ownership), be consolidated and form a single series with the EUR
750,000,000 3.00 per cent. Notes due 2015 issued on 21 April 2010 (the "Original Notes" and, together
with the New Notes, the "Notes", which expression includes, unless the context requires otherwise, any
further Notes issued pursuant to Condition 12 (Further Issues) and forming a single series with the
Original Notes and the New Notes). The Notes are the subject of an agency agreement dated 21 April
2010 as supplemented by a supplemental fiscal agency agreement dated 11 March 2011 (such agreement
as further amended or supplemented from time to time, the "Agency Agreement") each between the
Issuer, and Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch as fiscal agent (the "Fiscal Agent", which expression
includes any successor fiscal agent appointed from time to time in connection with the Notes) and the
paying agents named therein (together with the Fiscal Agent, the "Paying Agents", which expression
includes any successor or additional paying agents appointed from time to time in connection with the
Notes). The Notes have the benefit of a statutory guarantee from The Republic of Slovenia (the
"Guarantor"), further details of which are set out below. Certain provisions of these Conditions are
summaries of the Agency Agreement and subject to its detailed provisions. The holders of the Notes (the
"Noteholders") and the holders of the related interest coupons (the "Couponholders" and the
"Coupons", respectively) are bound by, and are deemed to have notice of, all the provisions of the
Agency Agreement applicable to them. Copies of the Agency Agreement are available for inspection by
Noteholders during normal business hours at the Specified Offices (as defined in the Agency Agreement)
of each of the Paying Agents, the initial Specified Offices of which are set out below.

1.      Form, Denomination and Title

        The Notes are serially numbered and in bearer form in the denominations of EUR 50,000 and
        integral multiples of EUR 1,000 in excess thereof up to and including EUR 99,000 with Coupons
        attached at the time of issue. Notes of one denomination will not be exchangeable for Notes of
        another denomination. Title to the Notes and the Coupons will pass by delivery. The holder of
        any Note or Coupon shall (except as otherwise required by law) be treated as its absolute owner
        for all purposes (whether or not it is overdue and regardless of any notice of ownership, trust or
        any other interest therein, any writing thereon or any notice of any previous loss or theft thereof)
        and no person shall be liable for so treating such holder. No person shall have any right to
        enforce any term or condition of the Notes under the Contracts (Rights of Third Parties) Act 1999.

2.      Status and Guarantee

(a)     Status of the Notes: The Notes constitute direct, general and unconditional obligations of the
        Issuer which will at all times rank pari passu among themselves and at least pari passu with all
        other present and future unsecured and unsubordinated obligations of the Issuer, save for such
        obligations as may be preferred by provisions of law that are both mandatory and of general
        application.

(b)     Guarantee of the Notes: The payment obligations of the Issuer under the Notes are
        unconditionally and irrevocably guaranteed by the Guarantor pursuant to Article 13 of the
        Slovenian Export and Development Bank Act (Zakon o Slovenski izvozni in razvojni banki
        (ZSIRB), Uradni list RS, Nos 56/2008 and 20/2009) (the "Guarantee"). The Guarantee of the
        Notes constitutes direct, general and unconditional obligations of the Guarantor which will at all
        times rank at least pari passu with all other present and future unsecured obligations of the
        Guarantor, save for such obligations as may be preferred by provisions of law that are both
        mandatory and of general application.




                                                  -9-
3.    Interest

      The Notes bear interest from and including 21 April 2010 (the "Issue Date") at the rate of 3.00
      per cent. per annum (the "Rate of Interest") payable in arrear on 21 April in each year (each, an
      "Interest Payment Date"), subject as provided in Condition 5 (Payments).

      Each Note will cease to bear interest from the due date for redemption unless, upon due
      presentation, payment of principal is improperly withheld or refused, in which case it will
      continue to bear interest at such rate (both before and after judgment) until whichever is the
      earlier of (a) the day on which all sums due in respect of such Note up to that day are received by
      or on behalf of the relevant Noteholder and (b) the day which is seven days after the Fiscal Agent
      has notified the Noteholders that it has received all sums due in respect of the Notes up to such
      seventh day (except to the extent that there is any subsequent default in payment).

      The amount of interest payable on each Interest Payment Date shall be EUR 1,500 in respect of
      each Note of EUR 50,000 denomination and EUR 30 in respect of each Note of EUR 1,000
      denomination. If interest is required to be paid in respect of a Note on any other date, it shall be
      calculated by applying the Rate of Interest to the Calculation Amount, multiplying the product by
      the relevant Day Count Fraction and rounding the resulting figure to the nearest cent (half a cent
      being rounded upwards) and multiplying such rounded figure by a fraction equal to the
      denomination of such Note divided by the Calculation Amount, where:

      "Calculation Amount" means EUR 1,000;

      "Day Count Fraction" means, in respect of any period, the number of days in the relevant period,
      from (and including) the first day in such period to (but excluding) the last day in such period,
      divided by the number of days in the Regular Period in which the relevant period falls; and

      "Regular Period" means each period from (and including) the Issue Date or any Interest
      Payment Date to (but excluding) the next Interest Payment Date.

4.    Redemption and Purchase

(a)   Scheduled redemption: Unless previously redeemed, or purchased and cancelled, the Notes will
      be redeemed at their principal amount on 21 April 2015, subject as provided in Condition 5
      (Payments).

(b)   Redemption for tax reasons: The Notes may be redeemed at the option of the Issuer in whole,
      but not in part, at any time, on giving not less than 30 nor more than 60 days' notice to the
      Noteholders (which notice shall be irrevocable), at their principal amount, together with interest
      accrued to the date fixed for redemption, if:

      (i)        other than as a result of (A) the amendments relating to the withholding tax regime as
                 introduced by the Slovenian Act Amending the Tax Procedure Act (Zakon o
                 spremembah in dopolnitvah Zakona o davčnem postopku (ZDavP-2B, Uradni List RS,
                 nos. 110/09 and 1/2010 (correction)) and as may be implemented, amended or
                 supplemented by subsequent underlying regulations, or (B) any amendments relating to
                 the Slovenian Personal Income Tax (dohodnina) regime and/or the Slovenian Corporate
                 Income Tax (davek od dohodkov pravnih oseb) regime that become effective prior to the
                 first Interest Payment Date, the Issuer has or will become obliged to pay additional
                 amounts as provided for or referred to in Condition 6 (Taxation) as a result of any
                 change in, or amendment to, the laws or regulations of The Republic of Slovenia or any
                 political subdivision or any authority thereof or therein having power to tax, or any
                 change in the application or official interpretation of such laws or regulations (including
                 a holding by a court of competent jurisdiction), which change or amendment becomes
                 effective on or after 19 April 2010; and

      (ii)       such obligation cannot be avoided by the Issuer taking reasonable measures available to
                 it;




                                                  - 10 -
      provided, however, that no such notice of redemption shall be given earlier than 90 days prior to
      the earliest date on which the Issuer would be obliged to pay such additional amounts if a
      payment in respect of the Notes were then due.

      Prior to the publication of any notice of redemption pursuant to this paragraph, the Issuer shall
      deliver to the Fiscal Agent:

              (A)      a certificate signed by two directors of the Issuer stating that the Issuer is
                       entitled to effect such redemption and setting forth a statement of facts showing
                       that the conditions precedent to the right of the Issuer so to redeem have
                       occurred; and

              (B)      an opinion of independent legal advisers of recognised standing to the effect that
                       the Issuer has or will become obliged to pay such additional amounts as a result
                       of such change or amendment.

      Upon the expiry of any such notice as is referred to in this Condition 4(b), the Issuer shall be
      bound to redeem the Notes in accordance with this Condition 4(b).

(c)   No other redemption: The Issuer shall not be entitled to redeem the Notes otherwise than as
      provided in paragraphs (a) (Scheduled redemption) and (b) (Redemption for tax reasons) above.

(d)   Purchase: The Issuer or any of its Subsidiaries may at any time purchase Notes in the open
      market or otherwise and at any price, provided that all unmatured Coupons are purchased
      therewith.

      In these Conditions:

      "Subsidiary" means, in relation to any Person (the "first Person") at any particular time, any
      other Person (the "second Person"): (a) whose affairs and policies the first Person controls or has
      the power to control, whether by ownership of share capital, contract, the power to appoint or
      remove members of the governing body of the second Person or otherwise; or (b) whose
      financial statements are, in accordance with applicable law and generally accepted accounting
      principles, consolidated with those of the first Person; and

      "Person" means any individual, company, corporation, firm, partnership, joint venture,
      association, organisation, state or agency of a state or other entity, whether or not having separate
      legal personality.

(e)   Cancellation: All Notes so redeemed or purchased by the Issuer or any of its subsidiaries and
      any unmatured Coupons attached to or surrendered with them shall be cancelled and may not be
      reissued or resold.

5.    Payments

(a)   Principal: Payments of principal shall be made only against presentation and (provided that
      payment is made in full) surrender of Notes at the Specified Office of any Paying Agent outside
      the United States by Euro cheque drawn on, or (at the option of the payee) by transfer to a Euro
      account (or other account to which Euro may be credited or transferred) maintained by the payee
      with, a bank having access to the TARGET System.

(b)   Interest: Payments of interest shall, subject to paragraph (g) (Payments other than in respect of
      matured Coupons) below, be made only against presentation and (provided that payment is made
      in full) surrender of the appropriate Coupons at the Specified Office of any Paying Agent outside
      the United States in the manner described in paragraph (a) (Principal) above.

(c)   Interpretation: In these Conditions:

      "TARGET2" means the Trans-European Automated Real-Time Gross Settlement Express
      Transfer payment system which utilises a single shared platform and which was launched on 19
      November 2007;




                                                - 11 -
      "TARGET Settlement Day" means any day on which TARGET2 is open for the settlement of
      payments in Euro; and

      "TARGET System" means the TARGET2 system.

(d)   Payments subject to fiscal laws: All payments in respect of the Notes are subject in all cases to
      any applicable fiscal or other laws and regulations in the place of payment, but without prejudice
      to the provisions of Condition 6 (Taxation). No commissions or expenses shall be charged to the
      Noteholders or Couponholders in respect of such payments.

(e)   Deduction for unmatured Coupons: If a Note is presented without all unmatured Coupons
      relating thereto, then:

      (i)     if the aggregate amount of the missing Coupons is less than or equal to the amount of
              principal due for payment, a sum equal to the aggregate amount of the missing Coupons
              will be deducted from the amount of principal due for payment; provided, however, that
              if the gross amount available for payment is less than the amount of principal due for
              payment, the sum deducted will be that proportion of the aggregate amount of such
              missing Coupons which the gross amount actually available for payment bears to the
              amount of principal due for payment;

      (ii)    if the aggregate amount of the missing Coupons is greater than the amount of principal
              due for payment:

              (A)      so many of such missing Coupons shall become void (in inverse order of
                       maturity) as will result in the aggregate amount of the remainder of such
                       missing Coupons (the "Relevant Coupons") being equal to the amount of
                       principal due for payment; provided, however, that where this sub-paragraph
                       would otherwise require a fraction of a missing Coupon to become void, such
                       missing Coupon shall become void in its entirety; and

              (B)      a sum equal to the aggregate amount of the Relevant Coupons (or, if less, the
                       amount of principal due for payment) will be deducted from the amount of
                       principal due for payment; provided, however, that if the gross amount available
                       for payment is less than the amount of principal due for payment, the sum
                       deducted will be that proportion of the aggregate amount of the Relevant
                       Coupons (or, as the case may be, the amount of principal due for payment)
                       which the gross amount actually available for payment bears to the amount of
                       principal due for payment.

      Each sum of principal so deducted shall be paid in the manner provided in paragraph (a)
      (Principal) above against presentation and (provided that payment is made in full) surrender of
      the relevant missing Coupons. No payments will be made in respect of void coupons.

(f)   Payments on business days: If the due date for payment of any amount in respect of any Note or
      Coupon is not a business day in the place of presentation, the holder shall not be entitled to
      payment in such place of the amount due until the next succeeding business day in such place
      and shall not be entitled to any further interest or other payment in respect of any such delay. In
      this paragraph, "business day" means, in respect of any place of presentation, any day on which
      banks are open for presentation and payment of bearer debt securities and for dealings in foreign
      currencies in such place of presentation and, in the case of payment by transfer to a Euro account
      as referred to above, which is a Target Settlement Day.

(g)   Payments other than in respect of matured Coupons: Payments of interest other than in respect
      of matured Coupons shall be made only against presentation of the relevant Notes at the
      Specified Office of any Paying Agent outside the United States

(h)   Partial payments: If a Paying Agent makes a partial payment in respect of any Note or Coupon
      presented to it for payment, such Paying Agent will endorse thereon a statement indicating the
      amount and date of such payment.




                                               - 12 -
6.    Taxation

      All payments of principal and interest in respect of the Notes and the Coupons by or on behalf of
      the Issuer shall be made free and clear of, and without withholding or deduction for or on account
      of, any present or future taxes, duties, assessments or governmental charges of whatever nature
      imposed, levied, collected, withheld or assessed by or on behalf of The Republic of Slovenia or
      any political subdivision thereof or any authority therein or thereof having power to tax, unless
      the withholding or deduction of such taxes, duties, assessments or governmental charges is
      required by law. In that event the Issuer shall pay such additional amounts as will result in
      receipt by the Noteholders and the Couponholders after such withholding or deduction of such
      amounts as would have been received by them had no such withholding or deduction been
      required, except that no such additional amounts shall be payable:

      (a)     in respect of any Note or Coupon presented for payment by or on behalf of a holder
              which is liable to such taxes, duties, assessments or governmental charges in respect of
              such Note or Coupon by reason of its having some connection with the jurisdiction by
              which such taxes, duties, assessments or charges have been imposed, levied, collected,
              withheld or assessed other than the mere holding of the Note or Coupon; or

      (b)     where such withholding or deduction is imposed on a payment to an individual and is
              required to be made pursuant to European Council Directive 2003/48/EC or any other
              Directive implementing the conclusions of the ECOFIN Council meeting of 26-27
              November 2000 on the taxation of savings income or any law implementing or
              complying with, or introduced in order to conform to, any such Directive; or

      (c)     in respect of any Note or Coupon presented for payment by or on behalf of a holder who
              would have been able to avoid such withholding or deduction by presenting the relevant
              Note or Coupon to another Paying Agent in a member state of the European Union; or

      (d)     in respect of any Note or Coupon presented for payment more than 30 days after the
              Relevant Date except to the extent that the holder of such Note or Coupon would have
              been entitled to such additional amounts on presenting such Note or Coupon for payment
              on the last day of such period of 30 days; or

      (e)     where such withholding or deduction is imposed on a payment to or for (i) a person
              resident for taxation purposes in a non-EU jurisdiction where the general or average
              nominal income tax rate is lower than 12.5 per cent. or (ii) an individual resident for
              taxation purposes in a non-EU jurisdiction.

      In these Conditions, "Relevant Date" means whichever is the later of (1) the date on which the
      payment in question first becomes due and (2) if the full amount payable has not been received in
      a city in which banks have access to the TARGET System by the Fiscal Agent on or prior to such
      due date, the date on which (the full amount having been so received) notice to that effect has
      been given to the Noteholders.

      Any reference in these Conditions to principal or interest shall be deemed to include any
      additional amounts in respect of principal or interest (as the case may be) which may be payable
      under this Condition 6 (Taxation).

      If the Issuer becomes subject at any time to any taxing jurisdiction other than The Republic of
      Slovenia references in these Conditions to The Republic of Slovenia shall be construed as
      references to The Republic of Slovenia and/or such other jurisdiction.

7.    Events of Default

      If any of the following events occurs and is continuing:

(a)   Non-payment: the Issuer fails to pay any amount of principal in respect of the Notes within three
      days of the due date for payment thereof or fails to pay any amount of interest in respect of the
      Notes within five days of the due date for payment thereof; or




                                               - 13 -
(b)   Breach of other obligations: the Issuer defaults in the performance or observance of any of its
      other obligations under or in respect of the Notes and such default remains unremedied for 30
      days after written notice thereof, addressed to the Issuer by any Noteholder, has been delivered to
      the Issuer or to the Specified Office of the Fiscal Agent; or

(c)   Insolvency, etc: (i) the Issuer becomes insolvent or is unable to pay its debts as they fall due,
      (ii) an administrator or liquidator of the Issuer or the whole or a substantial part of the
      undertaking, assets and revenues of the Issuer is appointed (or application for any such
      appointment is made), (iii) by reason of its financial difficulties the Issuer takes any action for a
      readjustment or deferment of any of its obligations or makes a general assignment or an
      arrangement or composition with or for the benefit of its creditors or declares a moratorium in
      respect of any of its indebtedness generally or any guarantee of any indebtedness given by it or
      (iv) the Issuer ceases or threatens to cease to carry on all or any substantial part of its business; or

(d)   Winding up, etc: an order is made or an effective resolution is passed for the winding up,
      liquidation or dissolution of the Issuer; or

(e)   Analogous event: any event occurs which under the laws of The Republic of Slovenia has an
      analogous effect to any of the events referred to in paragraphs (c) (Insolvency, etc.) to (d)
      (Winding up, etc.) above; or

(f)   Guarantee not in force: the Guarantee of the Notes is not (or is claimed by the Guarantor not to
      be) in full force and effect,

      then any Note may, by written notice by the holder thereof addressed to the Issuer and the
      Guarantor and delivered to the Issuer and the Guarantor or to the Specified Office of the Fiscal
      Agent, be declared immediately due and payable, whereupon it shall become immediately due
      and payable at its principal amount together with accrued interest without further action or
      formality. Notice of any such declaration shall promptly be given to all other Noteholders.

8.    Prescription

      Claims for principal shall become void unless the relevant Notes are presented for payment
      within ten years of the appropriate Relevant Date. Claims for interest shall become void unless
      the relevant Coupons are presented for payment within five years of the appropriate Relevant
      Date.

9.    Replacement of Notes and Coupons

      If any Note or Coupon is lost, stolen, mutilated, defaced or destroyed, it may be replaced at the
      Specified Office of the Fiscal Agent and the Paying Agent having its Specified Office in
      Luxembourg, subject to all applicable laws and stock exchange requirements, upon payment by
      the claimant of the expenses incurred in connection with such replacement and on such terms as
      to evidence, security, indemnity and otherwise as the Issuer may reasonably require. Mutilated
      or defaced Notes or Coupons must be surrendered before replacements will be issued.

10.   Paying Agents

      In acting under the Agency Agreement and in connection with the Notes and the Coupons, the
      Paying Agents act solely as agents of the Issuer and do not assume any obligations towards or
      relationship of agency or trust for or with any of the Noteholders or Couponholders.

      The initial Paying Agents and their initial Specified Offices are listed below. The Issuer reserves
      the right at any time to vary or terminate the appointment of any Paying Agent and to appoint a
      successor fiscal agent and additional or successor paying agents; provided, however, that the
      Issuer shall at all times maintain (a) a fiscal agent, (b) a paying agent in Luxembourg and (c) a
      paying agent in an EU member state that will not be obliged to withhold or deduct tax pursuant to
      European Council Directive 2003/48/EC or any other Directive implementing the conclusions of
      the ECOFIN Council meeting of 26-27 November 2000 on the taxation of savings income or any
      law implementing or complying with, or introduced in order to conform to, any such Directive.




                                                 - 14 -
      Notice of any change in any of the Paying Agents or in their Specified Offices shall promptly be
      given to the Noteholders by or on behalf of the Issuer.

11.   Meetings of Noteholders; Modification

(a)   Meetings of Noteholders: The Agency Agreement contains provisions for convening meetings of
      Noteholders to consider matters relating to the Notes, including the modification of any provision
      of these Conditions. Any such modification may be made if sanctioned by an Extraordinary
      Resolution (as defined in the Agency Agreement). Such a meeting may be convened by the
      Issuer and shall be convened by it upon the request in writing of Noteholders holding not less
      than one-tenth of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Notes. The quorum at any
      meeting convened to vote on an Extraordinary Resolution will be two or more persons holding or
      representing one more than half of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Notes or, at
      any adjourned meeting, two or more persons being or representing Noteholders whatever the
      principal amount of the Notes held or represented; provided, however, that certain proposals
      (including any proposal to change any date fixed for payment of principal or interest in respect of
      the Notes, to reduce the amount of principal or interest payable on any date in respect of the
      Notes, to alter the method of calculating the amount of any payment in respect of the Notes or the
      date for any such payment, to change the currency of payments under the Notes, or to change the
      quorum requirements relating to meetings or the majority required to pass an Extraordinary
      Resolution (each, a "Reserved Matter") may only be sanctioned by an Extraordinary Resolution
      passed at a meeting of Noteholders at which two or more persons holding or representing not less
      than three-quarters or, at any adjourned meeting, one quarter of the aggregate principal amount of
      the outstanding Notes form a quorum. Any Extraordinary Resolution duly passed at any such
      meeting shall be binding on all the Noteholders and Couponholders, whether present or not.

      In addition, a resolution in writing signed by or on behalf of Noteholders holding or representing
      three-quarters of the aggregate principal amount of the outstanding Notes who for the time being
      are entitled to receive notice of a meeting of Noteholders will take effect as if it were an
      Extraordinary Resolution. Such a resolution in writing may be contained in one document or
      several documents in the same form, each signed by or on behalf of one or more Noteholders.

(b)   Modification: The Notes and these Conditions may be amended without the consent of the
      Noteholders or the Couponholders to correct a manifest error. In addition, the parties to the
      Agency Agreement may agree to modify any provision thereof, but the Issuer shall not agree,
      without the consent of the Noteholders, to any such modification unless it is of a formal, minor or
      technical nature, it is made to correct a manifest error or it is, in the opinion of such parties, not
      materially prejudicial to the interests of the Noteholders.

12.   Further Issues

      The Issuer may from time to time, without the consent of the Noteholders or the Couponholders,
      create and issue further notes having the same terms and conditions as the Notes in all respects
      (or in all respects except for the first payment of interest) so as to form a single series with the
      Notes.

13.   Notices

      Notices to the Noteholders shall be valid if published in a leading English language daily
      newspaper published in London (which is expected to be the Financial Times) and, for so long as
      the Notes are admitted to trading on the regulated market of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange
      and it is a requirement of applicable law or regulations, published in a leading newspaper having
      general circulation in Luxembourg (which is expected to be the Luxemburger Wort) or on the
      Luxembourg Stock Exchange website (www.bourse.lu) and, in any event, shall be published in
      such other manner as may be required by the rules of any regulated market on which Notes are at
      such time listed and/or traded or, if such publication is not practicable, in a leading English
      language daily newspaper having general circulation in Europe. Any such notice shall be deemed
      to have been given on the date of first publication. Couponholders shall be deemed for all
      purposes to have notice of the contents of any notice given to the Noteholders.




                                                 - 15 -
14.   Governing Law and Jurisdiction

(a)   Governing law: The Notes and any non-contractual obligations arising out of or in connection
      with the Notes are governed by English law.

(b)   English courts: The courts of England have exclusive jurisdiction to settle any dispute (a
      "Dispute") arising out of or in connection with the Notes (including any non-contractual
      obligation arising out of or in connection with the Notes).

(c)   Appropriate forum: The Issuer agrees that the courts of England are the most appropriate and
      convenient courts to settle any Dispute and, accordingly, that it will not argue to the contrary.

(d)   Rights of the Noteholders to take proceedings outside England: Condition 14(b) (English courts)
      is for the benefit of the Noteholders only. As a result, nothing in this Condition 14 (Governing
      law and jurisdiction) prevents any Noteholder from taking proceedings relating to a Dispute
      ("Proceedings") in any other courts with jurisdiction. To the extent allowed by law, Noteholders
      may take concurrent Proceedings in any number of jurisdictions.

(e)   Process agent: The Issuer agrees that the documents which start any Proceedings and any other
      documents required to be served in relation to those Proceedings may be served on it by being
      delivered to the Embassy of the Republic of Slovenia, at 10 Little College Street, London SW1P
      3SH, United Kingdom or, if different, its registered office for the time being. If such person is
      not or ceases to be effectively appointed to accept service of process on behalf of the Issuer, the
      Issuer shall, on the written demand of any Noteholder addressed and delivered to the Issuer
      appoint a further person in England to accept service of process on its behalf and, failing such
      appointment within 15 days, any Noteholder shall be entitled to appoint such a person by written
      notice addressed to the Issuer and delivered to the Issuer. Nothing in this paragraph shall affect
      the right of any Noteholder to serve process in any other manner permitted by law. This
      Condition applies to Proceedings in England and to Proceedings elsewhere.

(f)   Waiver of immunity: To the extent that the Issuer may in any jurisdiction claim for itself or its
      assets or revenues immunity from suit, execution, attachment (whether in aid of execution, before
      judgment or otherwise) or other legal process and to the extent that such immunity (whether or
      not claimed) may be attributed in any such jurisdiction to the Issuer or its assets or revenues, the
      Issuer irrevocably agrees not to claim and irrevocably waives such immunity to the full extent
      permitted by the laws of such jurisdiction, and irrevocably and unconditionally consents to the
      giving of any relief or the issue of any process, including, without limitation, the making,
      enforcement, execution or attachment against any assets or revenues whatsoever (irrespective of
      its use or intended use) of any order or judgment made or given in connection with any
      Proceedings.




                                                - 16 -
                             SUMMARY OF PROVISIONS RELATING
                             TO THE NEW NOTES IN GLOBAL FORM

The New Notes will initially be in the form of the New Temporary Global Note which will be deposited
on or around the Closing Date with a common safekeeper for Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.

The New Notes will be issued in new global note ("NGN") form. On 13 June 2006 the European Central
Bank (the "ECB") announced that notes in NGN form are in compliance with the "Standards for the use
of EU securities settlement systems in ESCB credit operations" of the central banking system for the euro
(the "Eurosystem"), provided that certain other criteria are fulfilled. At the same time the ECB also
announced that arrangements for notes in NGN form will be offered by Euroclear and Clearstream,
Luxembourg as of 30 June 2006 and that debt securities in global bearer form issued through Euroclear
and Clearstream, Luxembourg after 31 December 2006 will only be eligible as collateral for Eurosystem
operations if the NGN form is used.

The New Notes are intended to be held in a manner which would allow Eurosystem eligibility - that is, in
a manner which would allow the New Notes to be recognised as eligible collateral for Eurosystem
monetary policy and intra-day credit operations by the Eurosystem either upon issue or at any or all times
during their life. Such recognition will depend upon satisfaction of the Eurosystem eligibility criteria.

The New Temporary Global Note will be exchangeable in whole or in part for interests in the New
Permanent Global Note not earlier than 40 days after the Closing Date upon certification as to non-U.S.
beneficial ownership. No payments will be made under the New Temporary Global Note unless
exchange for interests in the New Permanent Global Note is improperly withheld or refused. In addition,
interest payments in respect of the New Notes cannot be collected without such certification of non-U.S.
beneficial ownership.

The New Permanent Global Note will become exchangeable in whole, but not in part, for New Notes in
definitive form ("Definitive Notes") in the denomination of EUR 50,000 – EUR 99,000 each at the
request of the bearer of the New Permanent Global Note if (a) Euroclear or Clearstream, Luxembourg is
closed for business for a continuous period of 14 days (other than by reason of legal holidays) or
announces an intention permanently to cease business or (b) any of the circumstances described in
Condition 7 (Events of Default) occurs.

So long as the New Notes are represented by a New Temporary Global Note or a New Permanent Global
Note and the relevant clearing system(s) so permit, the New Notes will be tradeable only in the minimum
authorised denomination of EUR 50,000 and higher integral multiples of EUR 1,000, notwithstanding
that no Definitive Notes will be issued with a denomination above EUR 99,000.

Whenever the New Permanent Global Note is to be exchanged for Definitive Notes, the Issuer shall
procure the prompt delivery (free of charge to the bearer) of such Definitive Notes, duly authenticated and
with Coupons attached, in an aggregate principal amount equal to the principal amount of the New
Permanent Global Note to the bearer of the New Permanent Global Note against the surrender of the New
Permanent Global Note to or to the order of the Fiscal Agent within 30 days of the bearer requesting such
exchange.

If:

(a)     Definitive Notes have not been delivered by 5.00 p.m. (London time) on the thirtieth day after
        the bearer has duly requested exchange of the New Permanent Global Note for Definitive Notes;
        or

(b)     the New Permanent Global Note (or any part of it) has become due and payable in accordance
        with the Conditions or the date for final redemption of the New Notes has occurred and, in either
        case, payment in full of the amount of principal falling due with all accrued interest thereon has
        not been made to the bearer in accordance with the terms of the New Permanent Global Note on
        the due date for payment,

then the New Permanent Global Note (including the obligation to deliver Definitive Notes) will become
void at 5.00 p.m. (London time) on such thirtieth day (in the case of (a) above) or at 5.00 p.m. (London
time) on such due date (in the case of (b) above) and the bearer of the New Permanent Global Note will
have no further rights thereunder (but without prejudice to the rights which the bearer of the New




                                                  - 17 -
Permanent Global Note or others may have under the new deed of covenant dated 11 March 2011 (the
"New Deed of Covenant") executed by the Issuer). Under the New Deed of Covenant, persons shown in
the records of Euroclear and/or Clearstream, Luxembourg as being entitled to an interest in the New
Permanent Global Note will acquire directly against the Issuer all those rights to which they would have
been entitled if, immediately before the New Permanent Global Note became void, they had been the
holders of Definitive Notes in an aggregate principal amount equal to the principal amount of New Notes
they were shown as holding in the records of Euroclear and/or (as the case may be) Clearstream,
Luxembourg.

In addition, the New Temporary Global Note and the New Permanent Global Note will contain provisions
which modify the Terms and Conditions of the Notes as they apply to the New Temporary Global Note
and the New Permanent Global Note. The following is a summary of certain of those provisions:

Payments: All payments in respect of the New Temporary Global Note and the New Permanent Global
Note will be made against presentation and (in the case of payment of principal in full with all interest
accrued thereon) surrender of the New Temporary Global Note or (as the case may be) the New
Permanent Global Note to or to the order of any Paying Agent and will be effective to satisfy and
discharge the corresponding liabilities of the Issuer in respect of the New Notes. On each occasion on
which a payment of principal or interest is made in respect of the New Temporary Global Note or (as the
case may be) the New Permanent Global Note, the Issuer shall procure that the payment is entered pro
rata in the records of Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg.

Notices: Notwithstanding Condition 13 (Notices), while all the New Notes are represented by the New
Permanent Global Note (or by the New Permanent Global Note and/or the New Temporary Global Note)
and the New Permanent Global Note is (or the New Permanent Global Note and/or the New Temporary
Global Note are) deposited with a common safekeeper for Euroclear and Clearstream, Luxembourg,
notices to Noteholders may be given by delivery of the relevant notice to Euroclear and Clearstream,
Luxembourg and, in any case, such notices shall be deemed to have been given to the Noteholders in
accordance with Condition 13 (Notices) on the date of delivery to Euroclear and Clearstream,
Luxembourg, except that, for so long as such New Notes are admitted to trading on the Luxembourg
Stock Exchange and it is a requirement of applicable law or regulations, such notices shall be published in
a leading newspaper having general circulation in Luxembourg (which is expected to be the Luxemburger
Wort) or published on the website of the Luxembourg Stock Exchange (www.bourse.lu) and/or in such
other manner as may be required or permitted by the said rules.




                                                  - 18 -
                                         USE OF PROCEEDS

The net proceeds of the issue of the New Notes, expected to amount to EUR 347,245,547.95, will be used
by the Issuer for performing the activities pursuant to Article 11 of the Act and for funding the financial
transactions referred to in Article 12 of the Act.




                                                  - 19 -
                                   DESCRIPTION OF THE ISSUER

Introduction

SID – Slovenska izvozna in razvojna banka, d.d., Ljubljana (SID – Slovene export and development
bank), ("SID bank") was established by the Law on Export Insurance and Financing Corporation of
Slovenia (Zakon o Družbi za zavarovanje in financiranje izvoza Slovenije (ZDZFI), Uradni list RS, nos.
32/1992, 37/1995, 34/1996, 31/1997 and 99/1999) as an export credit agency ("ECA") and, after
obtaining its banking licence at the end of 2006, started to operate as a bank.

In 2008 SID bank was authorised to act as a specialised Slovene export and development bank to promote
activity pursuant to the Act pursuant to Article 11 of which SID bank shall support economic, structural,
social and other policies of the Republic of Slovenia by performing mainly financial services in segments
where market gaps occur or have been observed. SID bank is engaged in general banking activity as well
as acting as an agent of the Republic of Slovenia, including in insurance and guarantee schemes (for
further detail on the principal activities of SID bank see "Activities" below) and also to perform all
transactions envisaged under the Act on Insurance and Financing of International Commercial
Transactions (Zakon o zavarovanju in financiranju mednarodnih gospodarskih poslov (ZZFMGP),
Uradni list RS, no. 2/2004) (which consists primarily of insurance, the only financing activity that can be
performed thereunder is financing of international trade and investment financing, i.e. credit transactions,
by which the Issuer provides participants in international trade and financial institutions with financing
for international economic transactions as well as under the interest rate equalization programme). SID
bank is the only entity in Slovenia operating with a banking licence carrying out such activities.

SID bank is a private joint stock company with its registered office located at Josipine Turnograjske 6,
1000 Ljubljana, Republic of Slovenia. SID bank has no branches and operates exclusively at the
registered office of the bank. The share capital of SID bank amounts to EUR 300,000,090.70, which is
owned solely by the Republic of Slovenia and is fully paid up.

As at 31 December 2010, SID bank had total assets of EUR 3,896 billion (on an unconsolidated basis)
and EUR 4,086 billion (on a consolidated basis).

Rating

SID bank is currently rated by Moody's Investors Service Inc. ("Moody's"), which as at the date of this
Information Memorandum has assigned a rating of Aa2, stable outlook (which is equal to the rating of the
Republic of Slovenia).

Ownership

Since its establishment in 1992, the major shareholder of SID bank has been the Republic of Slovenia.
When SID bank was established, the Republic of Slovenia held 91.15 per cent. of the shares, with the
remainder of the shares being held by major Slovenian corporates, insurance companies and banks. Since
18 September 2008 the Republic of Slovenia has been the sole shareholder of SID bank, as prescribed by
Article 4 of the Act. Any amendment of the shareholder structure of SID bank would therefore require an
amendment of the Act by the parliament of the Republic of Slovenia.

History

In 1992 the Republic of Slovenia, together with the other initial shareholders (which comprised of banks,
insurance companies and corporates), established the Slovene Export Corporation, corporation for
Insurance and Financing of Slovene Export, Inc., Ljubljana (Slovenska izvozna družba, družba za
zavarovanje in financiranje izvoza Slovenije, d.d., Ljubljana) ("SID Inc.") to serve as an ECA. SID Inc.
was established for the purpose of conducting activities that are additional to and complementary with
those conducted by private financial institutions, with an emphasis on assuming risks that the private
market is not prepared to assume. At that time the Law on Export Insurance and Financing Corporation
of Slovenia determined that the share of the Republic of Slovenia in SID Inc. should not be lower than 51
per cent. When SID Inc. was established the actual share of the Republic of Slovenia amounted to 91.15
per cent.

On 2 October 2002 SID Inc. bought a 50 per cent. ownership stake in factoring company Prvi Faktor
d.o.o., Ljubljana ("Prvi Faktor Ltd.") which is a joint venture with Nova Ljubljanska banka, d.d.,




                                                  - 20 -
Ljubljana. Both companies have decided to sell their stake in Prvi Factor Ltd. due to changes in their
long term strategies. The sale process started in November 2010. In accordance with the timetable it is
expected that the transaction should be over by the end of 2011.

On 5 May 2004 SID Inc. established a company for out of court settlements and recovery of debts, Pro
Kolekt d.o.o., Ljubljana ("Pro Kolekt Ltd."), which is solely owned by SID Inc. Pro Kolekt Ltd. has a
network throughout south-eastern Europe, including Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Serbia,
Macedonia, Romania and Bulgaria.

As a result of the accession of Slovenia to the EU, the status of SID Inc. changed from an ECA to the
Slovene export and development bank as Slovene legislation was harmonised with European law. The
Act on Insurance and Financing of International Commercial Transactions came about as a response to
the harmonisation of laws that cover SID Inc.'s activities.

The Act on Insurance and Financing of International Commercial Transactions obliged SID Inc. to fully
harmonise its operations (other than operations that were specifically set out) with EU banking
regulations by no later than 31 December 2006. SID Inc. obtained its banking licence on 18 October 2006
and started to act as a bank on 1 January 2007 under the newly registered companies name SID –
Slovenska izvozna in razvojna banka, d.d., Ljubljana. Furthermore SID Inc. was obliged to harmonise its
status and activities, relating to its own account insurance business in line with EU regulations governing
activity of insurance companies by no later than 31 December 2004. As a result on 31 December 2004
SID Inc.'s insurance business for its own account was organised in the newly established insurance
company SID – Prva kreditna zavarovalnica d.d., Ljubljana ("SID – First Credit Insurance Company
Inc., Ljubljana"). SID Inc. is the sole shareholder of the insurance company whose activity is insurance
of short – term export credits.

In 2007, SID bank co-founded the Centre of International Cooperation and Development (Center Za
Mednarodno Sodelovanje in Razvoj, the "CMSR Institute") with the Republic of Slovenia.

With the entry into force of the Act SID bank was empowered to act not just as an export bank, but rather
as a bank which promoted export and development. It also enabled the Republic of Slovenia to buy out
the other shareholders of SID bank. Since 18 September 2008 the Republic of Slovenia has been the sole
shareholder of SID bank as required under the Act.

Pursuant to the Act, SID bank has authority to perform promotional and development tasks and services
in the areas of international trade, economic and development cooperation, entrepreneurial activities,
promotion of innovation through research and education, ecology, energy and construction of
infrastructure as well as in other areas of significance for the development of the Republic of Slovenia.

In addition to banking, the Act empowered SID bank to act as an authorized institution and to perform all
transactions under the Act on Insurance and Financing of International Commercial Transactions, namely
to provide insurance cover for medium and long term business transactions in the name and for the
account of the Republic of Slovenia. Funds for the liabilities which SID bank is obliged to pay are drawn
from precautionary and special precautionary reserves and insurance. The precautionary and special
precautionary reserves are formed from premiums paid, fees, recoveries and other revenues that are used
to provide coverage against non-marketable risks to participants in international trade. Precautionary
reserves are also formed from assets generated by SID bank by managing those assets and risks
underwritten (drawn from the budget of the Republic of Slovenia as well as other sources and assets). If
the funds drawn from these sources are not sufficient to cover the liabilities which are to be paid by SID
bank as agent on behalf of the Republic of Slovenia, then payment shall be made directly from the budget
of the Republic of Slovenia.

Although SID bank is a part of Slovenian banking sector it does not compete with private sector providers
of financial services.




                                                  - 21 -
The SID Bank Group activities as at 31 December 2010 are set out below:

                                                                                              In the name and for the
                                                                                                   account of the
                            SID Bank Group                                      Own account    Republic of Slovenia
 SID bank
 Refinancing ...............................................................        
 Direct financing ..........................................................        
 Co financing ..............................................................        
 Risk sharing ..............................................................        
 Guarantees ................................................................        
 Short term insurance outside the OECD countries .................                                      
 Medium and long term insurance .....................................                                   
 Investment insurance against non-commercial risks ...............                                      
 Interest rate equalization programme .................................                                 
 Guarantee schemes ......................................................                               

 SID – First Credit Insurance Company Inc., Ljubljana
 Short term insurance up to one year ..................................             

 Prvi Faktor Ltd.
 Factoring ..................................................................       

 Pro Kolekt Ltd.
 Debt collecting ...........................................................        
 Credit rating reports ....................................................         

In the above table, reference to risk sharing represents transactions in which commercial banks conclude a
loan agreement or issue a guarantee, and after such transaction is concluded the commercial banks
approach SID bank to participate in the transaction indirectly. If SID bank approves the transaction and
takes some of the risk then a separate agreement is concluded with the commercial banks, of which the
original debtor is not informed.

Insurance transactions performed by SID bank in the name of and for the account of the Republic of
Slovenia are separated from the transactions in its own account as shown by the balance sheet and the
annual reports of SID bank.

Dividends

Pursuant to the Act, the accumulated profit of SID bank shall not be distributed to the shareholders as a
dividend and shall instead be transferred to the reserves arising from profits.

Statutory Guarantee of SID bank liabilities

Under Art. 13 of the Act the Republic of Slovenia unconditionally and irrevocably guarantees the
liabilities incurred by SID bank arising out of transactions entered into in accordance with Articles 11 and
12 of the Act. Pursuant to this statutory guarantee the Republic of Slovenia is obliged to settle due
liabilities of SID bank to the creditor promptly upon the written request of the creditor. In accordance
with the Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia the Act may not be retrospectively amended. The
proceeds of the Notes will be used by SID bank for lending operations and activities in accordance with
the Act in support of small and medium sized enterprises ("SMEs"), research and development initiatives,
environmental protection and energy efficiency, regional development, infrastructure and internalisation,
and therefore the obligations of SID bank in relation to the Notes will be guaranteed by the Republic of
Slovenia.

Relationship with the Government of the Republic of Slovenia

SID bank is appointed as the sole Slovene export and development bank to promote activity pursuant to
the Act and to perform all transactions envisioned under the Act on Insurance and Financing of
International Commercial Transactions. Where SID bank carries out the activities of an export and
development bank such business is performed in the name and for the account of SID bank while the
insurance business is performed in the name and for the account of the Republic of Slovenia (other than




                                                                - 22 -
through its subsidiary SID – First Credit Insurance Company Inc., Ljubljana). These represent the
majority of SID bank's activities.

Since 2009 (or, in the case of (iii) below, 2010) SID bank has also acted as an agent of the Republic of
Slovenia under three guarantee schemes: (i) a guarantee scheme for enterprises (which was approved by
the European Commission on the basis of the provision of the temporary community framework for state
aid measures to support access to finance in the current financial and economic crisis (2009/C16/01)); (ii)
a guarantee scheme for individuals; and (iii) in 2010 a guarantee scheme was implemented for
investments of enterprises. Under each of the above mentioned schemes the Republic of Slovenia
provides suretyship for loans to enterprises or individuals provided by commercial banks. Under the
above mentioned schemes a suretyship may be granted in accordance with the state guarantee laws ((i)
Zakon o jamstveni shemi Republike Slovenije (Republic of Slovenia Guarantee Scheme Act, Official
Gazette nos. 33/09 and 42/09); (ii) Zakon o jamstveni shemi Republike Slovenije za fizične osebe (Act on
the Natural Persons Guarantee Scheme of the Republic of Slovenia, Official Gazette no. 59/09); and (iii)
Zakon o poroštvih Republike Slovenije za financiranje investicij gospodarskih družb (Act on Guarantees
of the RS for financing investments of enterprises, Official Gazette no. 43/100)). As SID bank acts as an
agent all payments to be made under the schemes would be paid directly by the Republic of Slovenia out
of budgetary proceeds. The role of SID bank in respect of each scheme is to conclude the agreements,
monitor the transactions and in case of non-payment, to check the obligation of the Republic of Slovenia
to make payment. Schemes under (i) and (ii) entered into before 31 December 2010 will be valid until 31
December 2012. However no new sureties may be entered into. The scheme under (iii) above is not
limited in time, however, the level of the suretyship cannot exceed EUR 1,000,000,000.

A further scheme, relating to reinsurance, was approved on 16 March 2010 and has been extended by the
European Commission for an additional year (for operation until 31 December 2011). Under the scheme
the Republic of Slovenia provides additional support to the insurance sector, through SID bank acting as
agent, by concluding reinsurance agreements with insurance companies to: (i) provide an additional
reinsurance limit (in the event that a primary limit approved by a commercial reinsurance company
should prove insufficient); and/or (ii) take over an insurance portfolio of a reinsurer who is unwilling to
prolong a contract. Any obligation to pay will be of the Republic of Slovenia directly and will be paid out
of budgetary proceeds.

The role of SID bank as an agent of the Republic of Slovenia is directly linked to the response of the
Republic of Slovenia to the global financial crisis, and is therefore expected to be a temporary
arrangement.

Activities

The financial services which SID bank, in accordance with the law provided for its own account in 2010,
included:

•       Granting credits, financing of business transactions;

•       Pursuant to SID bank’s objective to act (by complementing the market) in the segments of market
        irregularities and/or inefficiencies, SID bank has the role of a typical second-tier bank and as a
        result its objectives are pursued mainly through financial institutions (through on-lending, co-
        financing etc.). Banks thus represent the major part (78.8 per cent.) of its loan portfolio;

•       Issuing guarantees and other warranties;

•       As described above, SID bank operates guarantee schemes as agent on behalf of the Republic of
        Slovenia. This represents a minor part of SID bank's operations;

•       Operating for its own account or for the account of SID bank's subsidiary, SID-Prva kreditna
        zavarovalnica d.d., Ljubljana, in foreign means of payment, including foreign exchange
        transactions, foreign currency and interest linked financial instruments, transferable securities.
        This represents a minor part of SID bank's operations;

•       Operating for its own account in money market instruments (such as deposits and MM lines); and




                                                   - 23 -
•      Credit rating services: collection, analysis and provision of information on creditworthiness of
       legal entities. The credit rating activities of SID bank are essentially an internal function as they
       provide for the needs of SID bank and its subsidiaries.

The core business of SID bank therefore is medium and long term financing. Such financing transactions
must be approved by the Director of the relevant sector. However, for financing transactions over EUR
1.5 million credit committee approval must also be sought. The liquidity board is in charge of treasury
transactions and the credit committee has no influence in such transactions. Long term funding activities
(i.e. the maturity being one year or more) are approved by the credit committee whereas short term
funding activities (i.e. the maturity being less than a year) are approved by the liquidity committee.
Furthermore, the Supervisory Board must give its consent regarding:

1.      The conclusion of a particular legal transaction exceeding:

        •      25 per cent. of SID bank’s capital in the case of an investment in a bank corresponding to
               the criteria of a prime bank according to the provisions regulating the assessment of losses
               arising from credit risk (notwithstanding the above, approval shall not be required if the
               Supervisory Board had already approved the increase in exposure from items 3 and 4
               below);

        •      10 per cent. of SID bank’s capital in the case of an investment in a company whose credit
               rating, according to SID classification, equals or is better than BBB- or an investment in a
               bank that does not meet the criteria of a prime bank according to the provisions regulating
               the assessment of losses arising from credit risk;

        •      EUR 10,000,000 in the case of an investment in a company whose credit rating, according
               to SID classification, is worse than BBB- and better than C;

        •      EUR 5,000,000 in the case of an investment in a company that must be rated, according to
               SID classification, C or worse pursuant to the provisions regulating the assessment of
               losses arising from credit risk;

2.      The conclusion of a particular legal transaction due to which SID bank’s exposure:

        •      to a company whose credit rating, according to SID classification, equals or is better than
               BBB- or to a bank that does not meet the criteria of a prime bank according to the
               provisions regulating the assessment of losses arising from credit risk, is increased in such
               a way that it reaches or exceeds 25 per cent., 50 per cent. or every subsequent 25 per cent.
               of SID bank’s capital; or

        •      to a company whose credit rating, according to SID classification, is worse than BBB- is
               increased in such a way that it reaches or exceeds 10 per cent., 15 per cent. or every
               subsequent 5 per cent. of SID bank’s capital;

3.      The conclusion of a particular legal transaction that would, considering the aggregate exposure of
        SID bank, result in a large exposure of SID bank in the period of the proposal, to a particular
        person, taking into account the basis for determining exposure as stipulated in the ZSIRB;

4.      The conclusion of a particular legal transaction that would cause the large exposure of SID bank
        to a particular person to further increase so as to attain and/or to exceed 15 per cent., 20 per cent.
        and/or each further 5 per cent. of the basis for determining exposure as stipulated in the ZSIRB;

5.      The conclusion of a particular legal transaction that constitutes the basis of SID bank's exposure
        to a person in a special relation with SID bank, as specified by banking regulation;

6.      The conclusion of a particular legal transaction in respect of SID bank's long-term borrowing due
        to which the total long-term borrowing of SID bank since the last approval by the Supervisory
        Board is increased by more than 25 per cent. of SID bank's capital;

7.      Equity shareholdings in other companies or institutions, exceeding 1 per cent. of the share capital
        of SID bank;




                                                   - 24 -
8.      Where a transaction involves the engagement of a member of the Management Board in gainful
        activity;

        •      Write-off of SID bank's claims that exceed 0.5 per cent. of the share capital of SID bank;
               or

        •      Other matters in accordance with law and with the Articles of Association of SID bank.

        Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, and after the date of its implementation, SID bank utilised
        the above services and financial instruments to support economic, structural, social and other
        policies in the areas specified in Article 11, point 1, of the Act, as follows:

        •      Sustainable development and competitiveness in global market, with a particular emphasis
               on SMEs and entrepreneurship;

        •      Eco-friendly society and production: environmental and energy efficient projects;

        •      Knowledge-based society, competitive entrepreneurship: research, development and
               innovation ("RDI"), education, employment; and

        •      Regional and social development.

        Under a legal authorisation provided for in the Act, SID bank enjoys the status of an authorised
        institution under the Act on Insurance and Financing of International Commercial Transactions.
        For the account of the Republic of Slovenia, SID bank performs:

        •      Short term export credit insurance and reinsurance against non-commercial and other
               non-marketable risks;

        •      Investment insurance against commercial and/or non-commercial risks;

        •      Medium term export credit insurance against commercial and/or non-commercial risks;
               and

        •      The Interest Rate Equalisation Programme.

        In respect of the insurance transactions SID bank is acting as agent of the Republic of Slovenia
        and receives an annual agency fee of approximately EUR 2 million. In the event that insurance
        premiums collected are insufficient to cover the payments necessary, any additional amounts are
        paid directly by the Republic of Slovenia out of the budgetary expenditure. Any funds paid
        under the Interest Rate Equalisation Programme are also paid directly by the Republic of
        Slovenia out of budgetary expenditure.

        In performing its activities, SID bank uses various financial instruments with the aim of
        providing various forms of financing or related activities, promoting international development
        cooperation. SID bank, through the CMSR Institute (see below – CMSR Institute), also acts as an
        agent for the Republic of Slovenia in its framework of international development cooperation,
        which involves the giving of grants from the Republic of Slovenia in order to support Slovenian
        exporters, as well as in respect of the guarantee schemes as described above.

Corporate Governance

SID bank's corporate governance is carried out by the Management Board and the Supervisory Board.
The current Supervisory Board comprises seven members, which is appointed by a General Meeting of
Shareholders.

The composition of the Supervisory Board is as follows:

1.    Berk Skok Aleš              appointed 23 April 2009         (deputy)
2.    Hribar Milič Samo           appointed 23 April 2009         member
3.    Jaklič Marko                appointed 23 April 2009         member
4.    Kastelic Gregor Rok         appointed 23 April 2009         member




                                                  - 25 -
5.    Kert Andreja                 appointed 23 April 2009         (president)
6.    Kraljič Peter                appointed 23 April 2009         member
7.    Hugo Bosio                   appointed 1 October 2010        member

The Supervisory Board is responsible for the appointment of each member of the Management Board
including the President and CEO. Furthermore the Supervisory Board is also responsible for the overall
supervision of SID bank and SID Bank Group's operations to ensure compliance with EU and Slovenian
banking law and other applicable regulations. Whilst members of the Supervisory Board are
representatives of different bodies, they are all appointed by the Republic of Slovenia. Of the seven
members, five are appointed as the representatives of the public who are experts in a specific field at the
proposal of the minister in charge of development and European affairs, one member as the representative
of the ministry responsible for finance and one member as the representative of the ministry responsible
for economy. Members of the Supervisory Board are appointed for a period of five years and may be re-
elected.

The Management Board is responsible for the SID Bank Group and represents and manages SID bank's
business operations. Currently SID bank has a Management Board with two members; Mr. Sibil Svilan,
President and CEO, and Mr. Jožef Bradeško, member and CEO, they were both appointed on 1 January
2007. According to its by-laws SID bank could appoint a management board with three members. The
members of the Management Board represent SID bank jointly in accordance with statutory limitations
and the decisions of the Management Board have to be adopted by common accord. Members of the
Management Board are each appointed for a term of five years and may be re-elected. As the current
term of the Management Board expires on 1 January 2012, the invitation for applications for members of
the Management Board have already been published in an appropriate newspaper. The deadline for
applications expired on 1 January 2011, and both of the current members of the Management Board have
reapplied for this position. The Supervisory Board is obliged to inform the members of the Management
Board of their decision on re-election or non re-election no later than six months prior to the date of the
expiry of the mandate (in this case by the end of June 2011).




                                                  - 26 -
The organisational structure of SID bank is as follows:



                                  MANAGEMENT
                                    BOARD




        Advisors to the
                                                                      Internal Audit
       Management Board

                                                                Compliance Management




           Risk Management                   Promotional and                             Back Office and
                                             Development Financing                       Payments


         Information Protection                                                         Group Management
                                             Export and Project Financing

                                                                                        Distressed Investments
         Research and Strategy                                                          Management
                                             Treasury

                                                                                        Credit Rating

                                             Credit and Investments
                                             Insurance                                  Planning and Controlling


                                                                                        Accounting


                                                                                        Legal and Claims


                                                                                        IT

                                                                                        General Affairs and Human
                                                                                        Resources



The objective of internal audit is to promote a prudent and well-ordered evaluation of risk management,
as well as to improve the efficiency of risk management through providing independent and objective
assurance and consulting services. Internal audit is organised as an independent department, which
answers directly to the Management Board of SID bank. The chief audit executive reports directly to the
Management Board as well as to the Audit Committee of the Supervisory Board. The purpose, authority,
and responsibility of internal audit are defined in a charter which was approved by the Management
Board and the Supervisory Board.

The tasks of the Advisor to the Management Board (Consultant), aside from assisting in various day to
day assignments delegated by the board members, is to: cooperate with the Credit and Investment
Insurance and Legal and Claims departments on certain projects/assignments; assist in relations with
ministries and the Bank of Slovenia (in some areas of SID bank’s activities); support the functioning of
the Supervisory Board, shareholder’s meeting, government commission (state account business); assist
with the management of individual employment contracts; support the CMSR Institute; and to act as a
member of the Council, i.e. the supervisory board of the CMSR Institute (see below). The Consultant may
act as an additional member of the Management Board in the event that a Member of the Board is absent
for a day or more.

The compliance management function is an integral part of the internal control system of SID bank and
identifies, assesses and monitors the compliance risk to which the bank is or could be exposed. The
organisation of the compliance function is consistent with international standards (Basel, CEBS) and
national regulation. The compliance management function is currently comprised of one full-time
compliance officer who reports directly to the Management Board and reports to the Supervisory Board
every six months. The compliance officer has full access to all information and personnel.




                                                  - 27 -
Legal status of SID bank

The role, authorities, activities, ownership and organisation of SID bank are regulated by the Act, while
its insurance activity is regulated by the Act on Insurance and Financing of International Commercial
Transactions. Except as set out in Art.14(3) of the Act, SID bank is subject to normal banking regulation
and operates under the supervision of the central bank (Banka Slovenije), the Ministry of Finance, the
Agency for Insurance supervision and, following the bond issue on the domestic capital markets on 23
December 2008, is also under the supervision of the Securities Market Agency.

SID Bank Group

The chart below shows the shareholding structure of SID bank and its consolidated subsidiaries (the "SID
Bank Group") at 31 December 2010:




Center Za Mednarodno Sodelovanje in Razvoj (defined above as the CMSR Institute) is an independent
public institution which was founded jointly by the Republic of Slovenia and SID bank. As a public
institution it does not have shares (for further information on SID bank's involvement see CMSR Institute
below).

SID - Prva Kreditna zavarovalnica d.d., Ljubljana. ("SID - First Credit Insurance Company Inc.,
Ljubljana")

Prior to the establishment of SID Inc., in 1992, services for credit insurance were not available in the
Republic of Slovenia. Prior to the accession of the Republic of Slovenia to the EU, there were no foreign
offerers of credit insurance services. As at the date of this Information Memorandum, the market for
offering these kind of insurance services in Slovenia is still not fully developed; there are only two such
entities directly present on the market, SID - Prva Kreditna zavarovalnica d.d., Ljubljana (referred to as
"SID - First Credit Insurance Company Inc., Ljubljana") and Triglav Insurance Company Inc., whose
portfolio for this kind of insurance is minor, while foreign entities offering these kinds of services are
only indirectly present (such as Coface and Prizma). Without the presence of SID bank, Slovene
companies would have limited access to such services.

The registered principal business activity of SID - First Credit Insurance Company Inc., Ljubljana is the
conclusion and execution of property insurance in the insurance class of credit insurance. SID - First
Credit Insurance Company Inc., Ljubljana provides insurance for short-term credit to private companies
(normally, suppliers' credit for up to 180 days or, exceptionally, up to one year). The company provides
insurance against commercial and non-commercial risks for companies selling abroad and/or in the
Republic of Slovenia on deferred payment. Insurance contracts are normally made on a whole turnover




                                                  - 28 -
revolving basis covering the risks of non-payment in foreign and/or domestic markets. The whole
turnover basis represents the obligation of the insured party to insure all of its sales and its customers with
SID - First Credit Insurance Company Inc., Ljubljana to ensure that the insured party does not insure only
the deferred payment from those of its customers where such action is likely to be profitable.

In 2007 SID - First Credit Insurance Company Inc., Ljubljana started to conclude indirect insurance
contracts used to provide coverage, based on facultative quota reinsurance, for insurance operations of
loan collateral, collateralised with export credit agencies. The principal characteristics of insurance
transactions reinsured in such a manner were the same as direct insurance transactions.

The nominal value of the equity interest owned by SID bank was EUR 8.4 million as at 31 December
2010.

The table below shows the operation of SID – Prva Kreditna Zavarovalnica d.d., Ljubljana:

                                                                                  2009             2010
                                                                                    (EUR thousands)
Insurance premium: .........................................................        10,910          19,878
Paid out losses: ..............................................................     11,422          24,977

As at and for the year ending 31 December 2010, SID – Prva kreditna zavarovalnica d.d., Ljubljana had
equity of EUR 20.3 million, including credit risk equalisation reserve in the amount of EUR 1.7 million,
total assets of EUR 72.6 million and made a net profit of EUR 6.8 million.

Prvi Faktor d.o.o., Ljubljana ("Prvi Faktor Ltd.")

In 2002 SID bank acquired a 50 per cent. equity interest and half of the voting rights in the company Prvi
Faktor d.o.o., Ljubljana (referred to as "Prvi Faktor Ltd."), with the other 50 per cent. of the shares
being held by Nova Ljubljanska banka d.d., Ljubljana. The nominal value of the equity interest owned by
SID bank was EUR 584.2 thousand on the day of entry into the company. After the 2007 capital increase,
the nominal value of the equity interest owned by SID bank was EUR 1.6 million.

SID bank made the decision to enter into partnership with Prvi Faktor Ltd. on the basis of the
determination that the factoring market was not yet developed enough and with the purpose of developing
these activities in the region of southern and eastern Europe, which are as at the date of this Information
Memorandum still not fully developed. The markets of south-eastern Europe are of great importance to
Slovenian exporters. With this added to its sphere of activities, SID bank not only contributed to the
development of alternative forms of financing (for the domestic market) for Slovene exporters, but also
contributed to the development of the market for factoring in the states of south-eastern Europe.

As at the date of this Information Memorandum, Prvi Faktor Ltd. has subsidiaries in Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Serbia, through which Prvi Faktor Ltd. contributes to the re-establishment of the
financial market and to filling in market gaps. As the purpose for SID bank taking a share in the Prvi
Faktor Ltd. company had been fulfilled and NLB changed its strategy in respect of the factoring business,
they both began the process of selling the company Prvi Faktor Ltd. The sale is planned to be completed
by the end of 2011.

Prvi Faktor Ltd. has its office registered at Slovenska cesta 17, Ljubljana. The principal business activity
of the company is the performance of factoring services for clients with registered offices in the Republic
of Slovenia and abroad with regard to claims arising from the sale of goods and services. The company
provides the following services: (i) repayment assumption or purchasing of claims arising from the sale of
goods and services with or without protection against the risk of non-payment; (ii) financing of purchased
claims; (iii) claims management; (iv) payment for and collection of claims; (v) trading in claims; and (vi)
mediation and representation in factoring transactions in the Republic of Slovenia and abroad.

Prvi Faktor Ltd. founded, and is the sole owner of, subsidiaries in Croatia, Serbia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.

The nominal value of the equity interests owned by Prvi Faktor Ltd. in the companies of the Prvi Faktor
Group as at 31 December 2009 equalled the balance of the nominal capital on the same day.




                                                          - 29 -
As at and for the year ending 31 December 2010, Prvi Faktor Ltd. held equity of EUR 3.2 million, total
assets of EUR 129.9 million and made a loss of EUR 3.9 million. The Prvi Faktor group, consisting of
Prvi Faktor, Ljubljana, and its subsidiaries in Zagreb (Croatia), Belgrade (Serbia), Sarajevo (Bosnia and
Herzegovina) and Skopje (the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) had equity of EUR 6.2 million,
total assets of EUR 332.7 million and made a loss of EUR 4.7 million.

Pro Kolekt d.o.o., Ljubljana ("Pro Kolekt Ltd.")

Pro Kolekt d.o.o., Ljubljana (referred to as "Pro Kolekt Ltd.") specialises in out-of-court debt collection.
Originally, the company was established as a debt collection service for the SID Bank Group. Today it
handles debt collection cases for creditors in Slovenia and abroad. Among foreign clients, the principals
of Pro Kolekt Ltd. increasingly include export credit agencies and debt collection agencies. For foreign
creditors Pro Kolekt Ltd. performs representation in court proceedings (recovery of debt through court
action, voluntary compositions, bankruptcy proceedings, etc.) and provides credit rating information.

A lack of knowledge of the markets, as well as the poor financial discipline of the companies working in
these markets, together with the paid claims under the title of insurance for marketable and non-
marketable risks, as well as problems with debt recovery, have led SID bank to the conclusion that it is
necessary to establish a company whose activities will involve out-of-court debt recovery and
determination of rating information about the debtor and the country of the debtor. Pro Kolekt Ltd. has
also established a network of subsidiaries throughout south-eastern Europe (Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia, Macedonia, Romania and Bulgaria). With the services carried out by Pro Kolekt
Ltd. and its network, Slovene or other entities coming into the abovementioned markets have a means of
acquiring quality rating information, monitoring risks (monitoring debtors), out-of-court debt recovery, as
well as help or representation in court procedures.

The aggregate nominal capital invested by SID bank in Pro Kolekt Ltd. as at 31 December 2010 was
EUR 418.8 thousand. Accordingly, the nominal value of the equity interest of SID bank in Pro Kolekt
Ltd. as represented in the accounts of SID bank as at 31 December 2010 was also EUR 418.8 thousand.

As at and for the year ending 31 December 2010, Pro Kolekt Ltd. had a current equity value of EUR 0.3
million, total assets of EUR 0.5 million, and made a net profit of EUR 79 thousand. As at and for the year
ending 31 December 2010, through the Pro Kolekt group, consisting of Pro Kolekt Ltd., and its
subsidiaries in Zagreb (Croatia), Belgrade (Serbia), Sarajevo (Bosnia and Herzegovina), Skopje (the
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia), Bucharest (Romania) and Sofia (Bulgaria), SID bank held a
current equity value of EUR 284,315 (an increase of 4.0 per cent. compared to 2009), had total assets of
EUR 4.3 million and made a net profit of EUR 23 thousand.

Center Za Mednarodno Sodelovanje in Razvoj ("CMSR Institute")

Following the obligations accepted by the Republic of Slovenia within the framework of the European
Union, particularly through an increase in funds for international development cooperation, the Republic
of Slovenia and SID bank together founded the Center Za Mednarodno Sodelovanje in Razvoj (referred to
as the "CMSR Institute"). The CMSR Institute supports the development of several countries in south-
eastern Europe and through this to contribute to their convergence with the EU and thus add its own
contribution to the millennium goals, especially in the areas of ending poverty, universal education,
environmentally sustainable development and promoting global partnership. The CMSR Institute is a
non-profit organisation, which is operated as a channel for regional development and from Slovenia. The
aim of the CMSR Institute is to help development countries through the issue of grants and its activities
are complementary with those of SID bank. In 2010 a total of EUR 2.3 million was distributed by the
CMSR Institute to companies in development countries, which was funded by the Republic of Slovenia.

There are six members of the Council of the CMSR Institute, two are appointed by the Republic of
Slovenia, two by SID bank, one is an expert appointed from the public, and one is appointed from among
the employees of the CMSR Institute. The President of the Council is one of the co-founders'
representatives. As at the date hereof, the President of the Council of the CMSR Institute is the President
of the SID bank, Mr. Sibil Svilan. Amendment to the CMSR Institute's articles of association can only be
made with the mutual consent of the Republic of Slovenia and SID bank. SID bank is not liable for the
debt or other obligations of the CMSR Institute.




                                                   - 30 -
Strategy

The mission of SID bank is to develop, provide and promote long-term financial services designed to
complement financial markets for the sustainable development of Slovenia. The role and position of SID
bank are defined in the Action Strategy of the Issuer for the period 2011–2014.

In the next strategic period of 2011-2014, SID bank intends to maintain its position as the central
Slovenian development-promotional financial institution and as a key driver of the sustainable
development of the Republic of Slovenia, by the complete offer of services, which are complementary to
the financial markets, and by performing a linking role in the Slovenian development-financing system as
a whole.

By assisting clients in all phases of their business transactions, by supporting development projects,
ensuring safety in internationalisation processes and by providing financial services in one place, SID
bank aims to encourage Slovenian companies to exploit the opportunities opening up in international
economic and development cooperation. SID bank will strive to achieve these objectives largely through
the provision of long-term financing and insurance facilities.

The key strategic direction of SID bank is to enforce principals of sustainable development and
subsequently to become the main financial pillar of the Slovenian post-crisis development model. In
identifying the markets gaps and the areas where further value can be added, the following key future
fields of activity have been identified:

•          International business transactions and international economic cooperation;

•          Economic incentives with particular emphasis on SMEs, entrepreneurship, and venture capital;

•          Research and development;

•          Education;

•          Employment;

•          Preserving the environment and energy efficiency;

•          Regional development;

•          Residential issues;

•          Commercial and public infrastructures; and

•          International development cooperation.

With these objectives in mind, SID bank prepared an Annual Operational Plan setting out the tasks and
projects to be carried out in order to achieve the goals specified in its Action Strategy for the period 2011-
2014.

The new strategy takes into account the expectations of the European Commission on the one hand and
responses of the banking community to the high growth rates of SID bank's portfolio during the crisis on
the other. In this respect SID bank intends to align its further growth to the growth of the Slovenian
banking sector as a whole and to devote more resources to the internal growth aspects of its activities.
Additional reasons which support such a decision are conducting business under the conditions of lower
economic growth and the already very high financial leverage of the Slovenian economy.

SID bank plans to gradually reduce its interventional crisis activities and to focus instead on its prime
goals of strengthening sustainable development and promoting economic activity.

In the field of internationalisation the main objective of SID bank will be to lower dependence on
traditional export markets.

From the internal aspect and the aspect of learning and development, SID bank will focus in the next
strategic period primarily on promoting best banking practices in the Slovenian community, managing
specific internal risks, leading through objectives concepts and managing of the SID Bank Group.




                                                    - 31 -
Funding activity

In raising funds, SID bank focuses on selecting flexible borrowing instruments that can be fully tailored
to meet various customers' needs. SID bank has a diversified portfolio of borrowings, funds obtained
varying in maturity, size and the dynamics of disbursements. The Bank aims to obtain long-term sources
of funding with a maturity of up to 20 years, comparable in rates to funds secured by the Republic of
Slovenia.

SID bank's medium and long term funding policy includes:

•               Market loans (syndicated, bilateral loans, Schuldscheins);

•               International and domestic bond issues; and

•               Institutional loans from national development institutions and supranational organisations.

SID bank places special emphasis on the development of the relationship with national and supra
nationals development institutions (such as CEB, EIB, KfW, etc.).

Statement of financial position of SID bank by maturity as at 31 December 2010
                                                                  Assets                               Liabilities                            Gap
                                                                           per cent. of                            per cent. of
          Maturity class                             in EUR million        total assets     in EUR million         total assets           in EUR million
Sight ............................................               5.2                  0.1               0.0                   0.0                       5.2
Up to 1 month .............................                     35.8                  0.9               0.6                   0.0                      35.2
1 month to 3 months ...................                         21.2                  0.5              42.3                   1.1                     -21.1
3 months to 1 year ......................                      549.7                 14.1             595.4                  15.3                     -45.7
1 year to 5 years ..........................                 1,684.7                 43.3           1,382.7                  35.5                     302.0
Over 5 years ................................                1,599.0                 41.1           1,874.6                  48.1                    -275.6
Total ............................................           3,895.6               100.0            3,895.6                100.0                          0.0



Classification of SID bank's loan portfolio:

                                                                                                                                   SID bank
                                                                                                                              as at 31 December
                                                                                                                             2010                  2009
                                                                                                                                     (per cent.)
    A ...............................................................................................................               78.6              76.1
    B ................................................................................................................              18.9              21.5
    C................................................................................................................                1.7               1.6
    D ...............................................................................................................                0.3               0.3
    E ................................................................................................................               0.5               0.5

    Total ...........................................................................................................             100.0              100.0


The balance of SID bank's credit portfolio as at 31 December 2010 shows that 78.6 per cent. of all loans,
other claims and off-balance sheet liabilities are classified in the highest credit rating class, 'A', a further
18.9 per cent. of the portfolio falls into the 'B' credit rating class and 1.7 per cent. in 'C', whereas classes
'D' and 'E' together account for 0.8 per cent.

Non-performing loans:

                                                                                                                                   SID bank
                                                                                                                              as at 31 December
                                                                                                                             2010                  2009
                                                                                                                                  (EUR thousand)
    Gross loans total .............................................................................................        3,827,549           2,997,994
    Non performing loans .......................................................................................              29,348              23,436
    Non performing loans as per cent. of portfolio .........................................................                   0.8%                0.8%

Non-performing loans are loans which are classified in classification D or E.




                                                                                  - 32 -
Loan Portfolio by sectors

                                                                                                SID bank                         SID bank
                                                                                         as at 31 December 2010           as at 31 December 2009
                                                                                         Net Loans           Per cent.    Net Loans    Per cent.


    Financial intermediation, except insurance and pension funding .                      2,995,826               78.8    2,292,668          77.6
    Retail trade, except motor vehicles and motorcycles ...............                     118,845                3.2      124.167           4.2
    Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers .........                     103,626                2.8       67,961           2.3
    Manufacture of electrical equipment ..................................                   90,391                2.4       99,478           3.4
    Other financial intermediation n.e.c. .................................                  83,272                2.2       76,801           2.6
    Warehousing and support activities for transportation .............                      64,939                1.7       41,288           1.4
    Activities of holding companies .......................................                  40,261                1.1       46,769           1.6
    Financial leasing .........................................................              37,133                1.0       42,471           1.4
    Construction of buildings ...............................................                31,408                0.8       12,711           0.4
    Manufacture of basic metals............................................                  29,595                0.8        5,772           0.2
    Activities of head offices, management consultancy activities ....                       24,520                0.7       14,434           0.5
    Public administration and defence, compulsory social security ...                        22,691                0.6       13,659           0.5
    Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products...................                        19,570                0.5          263           0.0
    Gambling and betting activities ........................................                 19,058                0.5       19,674           0.7
    Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply .................                    18,488                0.5       18,232           0.6
    Manufacture of fabricated metal products, except machinery and
    equipment .................................................................               18,256                0.5           0           0.0
    Accommodation ..........................................................                  16,737                0.4      10,179           0.3
    Telecommunications .....................................................                  15,456                0.4      19,538           0.7
    Manufacture of food products ..........................................                   13,200                0.4      15,355           0.5
    Others ......................................................................             29,551                0.8      33,530           1.1


                                                                                          3,752,822
    Total ................................................................................................       100.0    2,954,952        100.0



The growth of SID bank's loan portfolio in 2010 mainly reflects its participation in the anti-crisis
measures. In 2010 SID bank approved new loans for the support of the economy in the amount of EUR
776.3 million through commercial banks, with an additional EUR 320.8 million in loans made directly to
companies.

In 2009 commercial banks remained the most significant of SID bank's partners, their share in SID bank's
loan portfolio reaching 78.8 per cent. Despite a significant growth in loans to clients other than banks, this
segment only took up 21.2 per cent. of the total loan portfolio in 2010.

The Central Bank of Slovenia (Banka Slovenije) sets the capital adequacy requirement for SID bank at a
level which is 50 per cent. of the level required for commercial banks in Slovenia.

Risk management

SID bank manages and controls risks in conformity with its risk management standards paying particular
attention to credit risk, while minimising other types of risk (currency, liquidity and interest rate risk).

The identification of risks is performed within organisational units that remain separated from
commercial units up to the level of the Management Board, thus ensuring independent risk assessment.
Responsibility for the direct implementation of risk management lies with the following bodies and
organisational units:

•            Credit Committee: management of credit risks and large exposures;

•            Liquidity Board: liquidity, currency and interest rate risks;

•            Assets - Liability Committee: balance sheet structure, capital adequacy, aggregate risk;

•            Risk Management Department: preparation of risk management policies, risk monitoring;

•            Credit Rating Department: assessment of clients' financial position; and

•            Back Office and Payments: daily follow-up on currency and liquidity risk within the limits set.




                                                                         - 33 -
Senior management (i.e. the management level immediately below SID bank's Management Board) is
responsible for the ongoing decisions with regard to SID bank's operations, risk management and the
implementation of decisions adopted by the Management Board.

Credit risk management:

The considerations when determining credit risk include: the risk of financial loss from credit
transactions; the country risk concerning the debtor country; where the debtor has securities, the risk of
such securities; and the credit risk of any counterparty default and derivative financial instruments.

Credit risk management begins before entering into a contractual relationship by determining the credit
rating of a client and by securing appropriate collateral. Credit risk management provides for credit rating
and appropriate insurance instruments are determined prior to the contractual relation with a potential
debtor. The credit exposure is approved by the Credit Committee and, in case of a large exposure, by the
Supervisory Board. During the course of a transaction, credit risk is managed by closely monitoring and
managing the credit portfolio, limiting the concentration of credit risk with a client, a group of clients, a
sector and a country, by classifying and creating provisions for anticipated losses, and by providing
sufficient capital when losses exceed expectations. Impairments and provisions constitute an important
element of managing the risk of loss arising from credit transactions. Impairments and provisions are
derived from group and individual assessments of losses, with losses arising from exposures falling into
credit rating classes C, D or E being assessed on an individual basis. Loans will only be written-off as a
last resort after a clearly defined procedure following expiry of the relevant limitation period, and only
after all formal and informal possibilities have been exhausted. Proposals for writing-off loans, prepared
in cooperation between several organisational units, are discussed by the Management Board or
Supervisory Board.

In relation to direct lending SID bank considers the credit of the borrower, while in relation to funds to be
on-lent SID bank will assess the credit risk of the bank that will on-lend such funds. As SID bank lends
78.8 per cent of its loan portfolio through commercial banks, the major share of credit risk relates to them.
Nevertheless, portfolio distribution in terms of sector shows that the ultimate borrowers come
predominately from the following sectors: manufacturing, financial and insurance activities,
transportation and storage, wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles, public
administration and defence, and compulsory social security.

The two lowest credit ratings are D and E. A D rating represents a critical financial condition where the
borrower is in default with no capacity for payment. Furthermore additional criteria include: a capital
ratio equal to zero or a negative capital ratio; a negative return on sale of more than 25 per cent.; and/or
delayed payments of 90 to 180 days (or exceptionally from 181 to 360 days). An E rating represents a
borrower who is in bankruptcy or liquidation or where payment has been delayed for over 360 days.

The Bank of Slovenia and SID bank debt classifications:

Bank of Slovenia           SID bank
                                                                      Characteristics
 classification          classification

A                    AAA                  Excellent financial condition, significant financial strength. The highest
                                              level of capacity for timely payment of financial commitments.
                                          Exceptional perspectives for business development. Lowest expectation
                                                                        of credit risk.

                     AA                     Strong financial condition, significant financial strength. A very high
                                          level of capacity for timely payment of financial commitments. Very low
                                                                   expectation of credit risk.

                     A                    Good financial condition, financial strength. A high level of capacity for
                                          timely payment of financial commitments. Not significantly vulnerable to
                                           adverse changes in financial and business conditions. Low expectation
                                                                        of credit risk.

B                    BBB                    Good financial condition. An adequate level of capacity for timely
                                            payment of financial commitments. Minor vulnerability to adverse
                                          changes in financial and business conditions. Currently low expectation




                                                    - 34 -
Bank of Slovenia          SID bank
                                                                      Characteristics
 classification         classification

                                                                       of credit risk.

                    BB                   Acceptable financial condition. The payment of financial commitments is
                                           vulnerable to adverse changes in financial and business conditions.
                                                       Unstable business trend. Possible credit risk.

                    B                    Moderate financial condition, a low level of financial strength. Unstable
                                          business trend. Highly vulnerable to adverse changes in financial and
                                           business conditions. A low level of capacity for payment of financial
                                                       commitments. Significant / high credit risk.

C                   C                      Poor financial condition. Significant probability for non-payment of
                                                  financial commitments. Very high credit / default risk.

D                   D                     Critical financial condition. In default. No capacity for payment of the
                                                                        commitments.

E                   E                                       Bankruptcy, liquidation, cancellation


SID bank manages and mitigates market price risks (interest rate risk and foreign exchange risk) and
liquidity risk in general by controlling exposures to these risks and by using hedging instruments (such as
forward contracts and interest rate swaps) where necessary.

Interest rate risk management:

The largest share of assets and liabilities is represented by euro-denominated instruments with interest
rates linked to EURIBOR. Residual risks nevertheless result from: timing differences relating to the
reference rate; and potential incomplete coordination in selection of the reference interest rate (between
three- or six-month EURIBOR). In addition to coordinating its interest rate calculations, SID bank took
an active approach to interest rate management. To contain the potential loss of SID bank arising from
changes in market interest rates, SID bank introduced hedging against interest rate risk. Reports on
interest rate risk and reports on interest rate gaps are prepared on a monthly basis.

FX risk management:

SID bank mostly operates in euros and it is not materially open to currency/exchange rate risk. During
the past year the open position was approximately EUR 150,000, representing 0.05 per cent. of SID
bank's capital. The open foreign currency position is calculated daily.

Liquidity risk management:

To ensure that all financial obligations are met regularly and continuously, SID bank plans inflows and
outflows (for its own account and contingency account). Different scenario analyses for liquidity
indicators are prepared weekly. Monitoring is done through liquidity indicators (ratios between inflows
and outflows over one and six-month periods) which are calculated daily. The Bank of Slovenia has set
the minimum value of such ratio for a one month period at 1.00. For SID bank the value of this indicator
normally exceeds 1.50 (where a high value indicates a long maturity of liabilities and appropriate
secondary liquidity). Reports on liquidity gaps are prepared monthly. SID bank does not take deposits on
call so there is no unexpected demands for payment which will need to be met.

The risk management aspect is particularly important in credit and investment insurance as these
transactions are conducted on behalf and for the account of the Republic of Slovenia. While losses are
offset using the contingency reserve, higher losses on these transactions could bring contingency funds
down to a level at which the Act on Insurance and Financing of International Commercial Transactions
requires additional funds to be appropriated from the budget of the Republic of Slovenia.

At SID bank, effective risk management starts with a proper organisational structure. Credit and
investment insurance transactions are carried out by a special department, which is separated from
banking operations up to the level of the Management Board. As in the banking segment (see further




                                                   - 35 -
'Activities' above), the authorisation to conclude transactions is clearly defined, with all transactions of
between EUR 250,000 and EUR 5 million requiring approval of the Management Board, and all
transactions over EUR 5 million requiring the approval of the International Trade Promotion Commission
(which operates as the supervisory board in respect of insurance transactions). The Commission also
holds ultimate authority over other risk management issues, such as approving insurance policies for
certain countries or groups of countries which, in addition to the insurance limits specified in the Act on
Insurance and Financing of International Commercial Transactions, limit the potential amount of loss.

Recent Developments

In July 2010, the Government of the Republic of Slovenia approved the concept of a "promotional and
development platform" as initiated by SID bank. The promotional and development platform is a strategic
tool of the Slovene government and ministries to develop and implement national policies in line with the
Europe 2020 policy objectives. SID bank is mandated to act as an effective catalyst to bring together
public and private financial sources to boost investments in a knowledge based and low carbon oriented
society.

In November 2010, SID bank as part of its anti-crisis activities arranged EUR 385 million long-term
funds intermediated through commercial banks to promote sustainable economic growth and development,
environmental projects, entrepreneurship and to create new jobs with a higher added value. The final
beneficiaries are legal entities under private or public law established in the Republic of Slovenia,
entrepreneurs and other individuals and legal entities registered outside the Republic of Slovenia, that act
as buyers of Slovenian goods or services or are majority owned by Slovenian legal entities.

Since 31 December 2008, the minimum amount of share capital prescribed by the Act was increased from
EUR 140 million to EUR 300 million. This increase in share capital enabled SID bank to accelerate its
funding and lending activities. As of 31 December 2010 SID bank loans amounted to EUR 3.753 billion
of which EUR 2.956 billion were loans to banks while loans to the non-banking sector amounted to EUR
0.797 billion. As at 31 December 2010, SID bank’s loans represented 9.6 per cent of the total amount of
the loans in Slovenia, which is 2.1 percentage points higher than in 2009, primarily as a result of high
growth of SID bank’s loan portfolio (+27 per cent.) and a drop in the Slovenian banking system as a
whole (-1.2 per cent.). As of 31 December 2010 the total assets of SID bank were EUR 3.896 billion.

Apart from its business for its own account SID bank took a key role in the Republic of Slovenia's
initiatives to minimise the negative consequences of the global economical crisis. As in other countries
the Republic of Slovenia adopted legislative measures to tackle the existing liquidity problems on the
market. To make the measures functional SID bank has been authorised to perform activities on behalf of
the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Slovenia. In response to the communication from the European
Commission (temporary community framework for state aid measures to support access to finance the
current financial and economic crisis (2009/C16/01)), a guarantee scheme for enterprises was launched.
Additionally SID bank has in 2009 launched two further guarantees schemes: (i) a guarantee scheme for
individuals, and (ii) a guarantee scheme for enterprise, in which SID bank acts as an agent of the Republic
of Slovenia. As of 31 December 2010 only the guarantee scheme for enterprise investments is still in use.

Litigation

Whilst SID bank and its subsidiaries are from time to time involved in litigation, no such litigation is
currently open that would be material in the context of the issue of the Notes.




                                                  - 36 -
                                                        SELECTED FINANCIAL INFORMATION

                                                                         LIABILITY STRUCTURE
                                                                                                             SID bank                SID Bank Group
                                                                                                         As at 31 December          As at 31 December
                                                                                                        20101         2009         20101          2009
                                                                                                                        (EUR thousand)
    Financial liabilities held for trading .............................                                        29           271            29           271

    Derivative financial instruments held for hedging .................                                         0        1,202             0          1,202
    Financial liabilities measured at amortised cost .....................                              3,560,863    2,693,134     3,680,743      2,814,538
    - Bank deposits .............................................................................           1,001      155,066         1,001        155,066
    - Deposits of clients other than banks ..........................................                           5       91,870             5         91,870
    - Loans of banks ...........................................................................        2,023,693    1,799,948     2,143,573      1,921,338
    - Loans of clients other than banks ..............................................                     99,998       99,108        99,998         99,122
    - Debt securities ............................................................................      1,436,166      547,142     1,436,166        547,142

    Provision ......................................................................................       2,761         4,382           48,474     56,695
    - Bank provision ...........................................................................           2,577         4,250            2,577      4,250
    - Liabilities from insurance contracts ...........................................                         0             0           43,933     50,294
    - Other provision...........................................................................             184           132            1,964      2,151

    Corporate income tax liabilities ................................................                      1,505             138          3,557          138
    - Tax liabilities ..............................................................................       1,382               0          3,434            0
    - Non-current deferred tax liabilities ............................................                      123             138            123          138

    Other liabilities ...........................................................................          2,478         3,785            8,333      9,063
    TOTAL LIABILITIES ..............................................................                    3,567,636    2,702,912     3,741,136      2,881,907


1
       Unaudited and subject to amendment.

SID bank’s loans rose by 11.8 per cent., totalling EUR 2.1 billion at the end of 2010. The total amount of
new long-term loans hired by SID bank was EUR 0.2 billion in 2010.

Debt securities include bond SI01, issued at the end of 2008, in 2009 and in 2010, totalling EUR 569
million, bond SEDABI3 04/21/15, issued in April 2010, totalling EUR 750 million, as well as other
promissory notes and bonds issued in 2009 and in 2010.

The composition structure of liabilities in the consolidated financial statements of SID Bank Group is
very similar to that of the Statement of Financial Position of SID bank.

SID bank, as an authorised institution under the Act on Insurance and Financing of International
Commercial Transactions and under the Act, strives to obtain favourable sources of long-term financing
in Slovenia and in international markets, and is Slovenia’s only bank that has in previous years
continuously raised funds in the international markets.

In raising funds SID bank focuses on selecting flexible borrowing instruments that can be fully tailored to
meet various customers' needs. Accordingly, it has a diversified portfolio of borrowings, funds obtained
varying in maturity, size and the dynamics of disbursements. SID bank aims to obtain long-term sources
of funding with a maturity of up to 20 years, comparable in rates to funds secured by the Republic of
Slovenia, with due consideration given to the mark-up above the rates for government borrowing.

Working to provide businesses and their commercial banks with favourable long-term sources of
financing for the operations under the Act, SID bank raised funds through diverse financial instruments in
Slovenia and international financial markets.




                                                                                               - 37 -
                                                                              ASSETS STRUCTURE
                                                                                                                      SID bank                SID Bank Group
                                                                                                                  As at 31 December          As at 31 December
                                                                                                                 20101         2009         20101         2009
                                                                                                                                 (EUR thousand)
Cash and balances with the central bank ............................................                                    12        1,073           13         3,636
Financial assets held for trading ...........................................................                            0          248            0           248
Financial assets held for hedging ..........................................................                        14,563        2,101       14,563         2,101
Available-for-sale financial assets .........................................................                      110,956       50,051      132,638        72,390
Loans ........................................................................................................   3,752,874    2,954,952    3,889,529     3,091,499
  - Loans to banks ......................................................................................        2,955,894    2,292,668    2,976,328     2,306,883
  - Loans to clients other than banks .........................................................                    796,980      662,284      913,201       784,616
Property, plant and equipment .............................................................                          4,135        4,441        4,435         4,845
Investment property ...............................................................................                      0            0          157            80
Intangible assets ......................................................................................               252          395          882         1,078
Long-term investments in equity of subsidiaries, associates and                                                     11,919        7,712          419           419
joint ventures ...........................................................................................
Corporate income tax assets .....................................................................                     426        1,019         2,230        2,155
- Assets for corporate income tax .............................................................                         0          656           416        1,180
- Assets for deferred taxes ........................................................................                  426          363         1,814          975
Other assets .............................................................................................            445        2,902        41,254       37,182
- Insurers assets ........................................................................................              0            0        38,313       32,228
- Other assets.............................................................................................           445        2,902         2,941        4,954
TOTAL ASSETS ....................................................................................                3,895,582    3,024,894    4,086,120     3,215,633


1
      Unaudited and subject to amendment.

As at 31 December 2010, total assets of SID bank stood at EUR 3.9 billion, showing an increase of 28.8
per cent. compared to 31 December 2009.

In 2010 the increase in the total assets of SID bank was, like in the previous years, a result of intensive
financing activities. Loans to banks (including deposits totalling EUR 38.4 million) went up 28.9 per
cent., and loans to clients other than banks saw a 20.3 per cent. upturn. Loans to banks represented 75.9
per cent. of total assets as at 31 December 2010; their share as at 31 December 2009 was 75.8 per cent.

The composition of assets of the SID Bank Group is similar to the composition of assets of SID bank.




                                                                                                - 38 -
                                               TAXATION

The following is a general description of certain tax considerations relating to the Notes. It does not
purport to be a complete analysis of all tax considerations relating to the Notes whether in those
countries or elsewhere. Prospective purchasers of Notes should consult their own tax advisers as to the
consequences under the tax laws of the country of which they are resident for tax purposes and the tax
laws of the Republic of Slovenia of acquiring, holding and disposing of Notes and receiving payments of
interest, principal and/or other amounts under the Notes. This summary is based upon the law as in
effect on the date hereof and is subject to any change in law that may take effect after such date.

Also, investors should note that the appointment by an investor in Notes, or any person through which an
investor holds Notes, of a custodian, collection agent or similar person in relation to such Notes in any
jurisdiction may have tax implications. Investors should consult their own tax advisers in relation to the
tax consequences for them of any such appointment.

Republic of Slovenia

1.      Taxation of Interest Income

Taxation of interest income derived from the Notes will differ depending on whether, at the time when
the Issuer will make payments of interests under the Notes, the Notes will be admitted to trading on a
regulated market or a multilateral trading facility (“MTF”) within an EU member state or Organisation
for Economic Cooperation (“OECD”) member state (the Notes, while so admitted to trading, hereinafter
referred as “Quoted Eurobonds”).

If, and for as long as the Notes qualify as Quoted Eurobonds, the Issuer will be entitled to make all
payments of interest under the Notes free and clear of any withholding or deduction for or on account of
taxes pursuant to applicable Slovenian law.

If, however, at the time when the Issuer will make a payment of interests under the Notes, the Notes do
not qualify as a Quoted Eurobonds then:

(a)     such payment will be subject to withholding tax payable by the Issuer at the maximum rate
        applicable under Slovenian taxation law (currently being 20 per cent.); and

(b)     if the income derived from such interest payment would, if received directly by its beneficial
        owner, be exempted from Slovenian tax or subject to tax at a rate lower than applied for the
        purpose of such withholding tax, the beneficial owner will be entitled to claim a refund of the
        excessive amount of tax so withheld from the Slovenian tax administration.

Corporate Investors

Interest on the Notes received by a legal person resident for taxation purposes in the Republic of Slovenia
or a permanent establishment (poslovna enota) in the Republic of Slovenia of a legal person not resident
for taxation purposes in the Republic of Slovenia will be subject to Slovenian Corporate Income Tax
(davek od dohodkov pravnih oseb) as a part of its overall income tax levied at the rate of 20 per cent.

If, and for as long as the Notes qualify as Quoted Eurobonds, no Slovenian tax will be levied on payments
under the Notes to legal persons not resident for taxation purposes in the Republic of Slovenia and having
no permanent establishment (poslovna enota) in the Republic of Slovenia. If, however, at the time when
the Issuer will make a payment of interest under the Notes, the Notes do not qualify as Quoted Eurobonds
and the amount so paid will be subject to withholding tax at the rate of 20 per cent., legal persons who
beneficially received such interest will be entitled to claim a refund of the tax so withheld (a) in the case
of legal persons resident for taxation purposes in certain non-EU jurisdictions where the general or
average nominal income tax rate is lower than 12.5 per cent and which are included in the list of "tax
havens" published from time to time by the Ministry of Finance, of the amount exceeding 15 per cent. of
the amount paid; or (b) in the case of any other legal persons, in the full amount of the tax so withheld.

Individuals

The amounts of interest on the Notes received by an individual resident for tax purposes in Slovenia will
be subject to Slovenian Personal Income Tax (dohodnina) assessed on the income so derived at the rate of




                                                   - 39 -
20 per cent., which tax is the final tax imposed by Slovenia on interest on the Notes, except where such
income qualifies as business income (dohodek iz dejavnosti) of such individual, in which case such
income will be subject to Slovenian Personal Income Tax as a part of overall annual business income at
the rate applicable in accordance with the progressive tax scale which may reach up to 41 per cent.

The amounts of interest on the Notes received by an individual who is not resident for taxation purposes
in Slovenia will be fully exempt from Slovenian tax if and for as long as the Notes qualify as Quoted
Eurobonds. If, however, at the time when the Issuer makes a payment of interest under the Notes, the
Notes do not qualify as Quoted Eurobonds, the amounts of interest on the Notes received by an individual
not resident for tax purposes in Slovenia, will be subject to Slovenian Personal Income Tax assessed on
the income so derived at the rate of 20 per cent., which tax is the final tax imposed by Slovenia on interest
on the Notes, provided that an individual who is resident for taxation purposes in an EU Member State
(other than Slovenia) shall be fully exempt from this Slovenian tax in circumstances where (i) the
individual in question is the beneficial owner of such interest; and (ii) the paying agent (plačilni
zastopnik) as defined in the Slovenian Tax Procedure Act (Zakon o davčnem postopku (ZDavP-2-UPB4),
Uradni list RS, No. 13/2011) is required to report the payment to the tax authorities in the jurisdiction of
the relevant paying agent in accordance with the provisions implementing the European Council Directive
2003/48/EC of 3 June 2003 on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments.

Slovenian Personal Income Tax on non-business interest income will only be levied by way of
withholding tax if, at the time when the Issuer makes a payment of interest under the Notes, the Notes
will not qualify as Quoted Eurobond.

Any individual who is liable for Slovenian Personal Income Tax on interest income under the Notes as
non-business income and receives an amount of interest under the Notes free of any deduction for account
of this tax shall (i) declare each amount so received in a tax return filed by the 15th day of a calendar
month for the period of the previous three calendar months; and (ii) pay the amount of tax in accordance
with the relevant decision of the tax authorities.

2.      Taxation of Capital Gains

Corporate Investors

Capital gains earned on the sale or disposition of the Notes by a legal person resident for taxation
purposes in the Republic of Slovenia or a permanent establishment (poslovna enota) in the Republic
Slovenia of a legal person not resident for taxation purposes in the Republic of Slovenia will be subject to
Slovenian Corporate Income Tax as a part of its overall income tax levied at the rate of 20 per cent.

Capital gains earned by legal persons not resident for taxation purposes in the Republic of Slovenia and
having no permanent establishment in the Republic of Slovenia are not subject to Slovenian taxation.

Individuals

Under the Slovenian Personal Income Tax Act, capital gains from the sale or other disposition of debt
securities held as non-business assets are in general exempt from taxation, while capital gains earned as
business income (dohodek iz dejavnosti) of an individual resident for taxation purposes in the Republic of
Slovenia are subject to Slovenian Personal Income Tax as a part of such individual's overall annual
business income at the rate applicable in accordance with the progressive tax scale which may reach up to
41 per cent.

Capital gains earned on the sale or disposition of the Note by an individual resident for taxation purposes
in the Republic of Slovenia may, in circumstances described in the Act on the taxation of profits from the
disposal of derivatives (Zakon o davku od dobička od odsvojitve izvedenih finančnih instrumentov
(ZDDOIFI) Uradni list RS no. 65/08), be subject to tax levied at the rate of up to 40 per cent.

3.      Value Added Tax

Pursuant to Article 44/4(e) of the Value Added Tax Act (Zakon o davku na dodano vrednost (ZDDV-1-
UPB3) Uradni list RS, No. 13/2011), transactions with securities are VAT-exempt in Slovenia. According
to the law, interest on debt securities is not subject to VAT, thus VAT is neither charged nor payable.




                                                   - 40 -
4.      Inheritance and gift taxations

Natural persons and private law entities, within the meaning of the Slovenian Inheritance and Gift Tax
Act (Zakon o davku na dediščine in darila (ZDDD), Uradni list RS no. 117/06) may be subject to
Slovenian inheritance and gift tax in case of the transfer of the Notes mortis causa or inter vivos. The
value of all transfers by the same person in one year is considered when ascertaining the taxable amount
for such purposes.

Inheritance tax and gift tax is assessed by reference to the market value of property subject to taxation at
the time of the occurrence of tax liability, decreased by debts, costs and charges relating to this property.
In the case of movable property (such as the Notes) the tax base for inheritances and gifts is decreased by
EUR 5,000.

Tax on inheritance and gifts is not paid by the heir or recipient of a gift of a first hereditary order
(children and spouse).

Tax rates are progressive and differ depending on the hereditary order. Tax rates for inheritance and gift
tax range:

(i)     from 5 per cent. up to 14 per cent. for the second hereditary order (parents, siblings and their
        descendants),

(ii)    from 8 per cent. up to 17 per cent. for the third hereditary order (grandparents) and

(iii)   from 12 per cent. up to 39 per cent. for all subsequent hereditary orders (others).

Luxembourg Taxation

The following is a general description of certain Luxembourg tax considerations relating to the Notes. It
specifically contains information on taxes on the income from the Notes withheld at source and provides
an indication as to whether the Issuer assumes responsibility for the withholding of taxes at the source. It
does not purport to be a complete analysis of all tax considerations relating to the Notes, whether in
Luxembourg or elsewhere. Prospective purchasers of the Notes should consult their own tax advisers as
to which countries' tax laws could be relevant to acquiring, holding and disposing of the Notes payments
of interest, principal and/or other amounts under the Notes and the consequences of such actions under
the tax laws of Luxembourg. This summary is based upon the law as in effect on the date of this
Information Memorandum. The information contained within this section is limited to withholding
taxation issues, and prospective investors should not apply any information set out below to other areas,
including (but not limited to) the legality of transactions involving the Notes.

All payments of interest and principal by the Luxembourg Paying Agent under the Notes can be made
free and clear of any withholding or deduction for or on account of any taxes of whatsoever nature
imposed, levied, withheld, or assessed by Luxembourg or any political subdivision or taxing authority
thereof or therein, in accordance with the applicable Luxembourg law, subject however to:

(i)     the application of the Luxembourg law of 21 June 2005 implementing the European Union
        Savings Directive (Council Directive 2003/48/EC) and providing for the possible application of a
        withholding tax (20 per cent. from 1 July 2008 to 30 June 2011 and 35 per cent. from 1 July 2011)
        on interest paid to certain non Luxembourg resident investors (individuals and certain types of
        entities called "residual entities") in the event of the Issuer appointing a paying agent in
        Luxembourg within the meaning of the above-mentioned directive (see, paragraph "EU Savings
        Tax Directive" below); and

(ii)    the application as regards Luxembourg resident individuals of the Luxembourg law of 23
        December 2005 (as amended by the law of 17 July 2008) which has introduced a 10 per cent.
        final withholding tax on savings income (i.e. with certain exemptions, savings income within the
        meaning of the Luxembourg law of 21 June 2005 implementing the European Union Savings
        Directive). This law should apply to savings income accrued as from 1 July 2005 and paid as
        from 1 January 2006.




                                                   - 41 -
Responsibility for the withholding of tax in application of the above-mentioned Luxembourg laws of 21
June 2005 and 23 December 2005 (as amended by the law of 17 July 2008) is assumed by the
Luxembourg paying agent within the meaning of these laws and not by the Issuer.

EU Savings Tax Directive

Under EC Council Directive 2003/48/EC on the taxation of savings income, each Member State is
required to provide to the tax authorities of another Member State details of payments of interest or other
similar income paid by a person within its jurisdiction to, or collected by such a person for, an individual
resident or certain limited types of entity established in that other Member State; however, for a
transitional period, Austria and Luxembourg may instead apply a withholding system in relation to such
payments, deducting tax at rates rising over time to 35 per cent. The transitional period is to terminate at
the end of the first full fiscal year following agreement by certain non-EU countries to the exchange of
information relating to such payments.

A number of non-EU countries including Switzerland, and certain dependent or associated territories of
certain Member States, have adopted similar measures (either provision of information or transitional
withholding) in relation to payments made by a person within its jurisdiction to, or collected by such a
person for, an individual resident or certain limited types of entity established in a Member State. In
addition, the Member States have entered into provision of information or transitional withholding
arrangements with certain of those dependent or associated territories in relation to payments made by a
person in a Member State to, or collected by such a person for, an individual resident or certain limited
types of entity established in one of those territories.

The European Commission has proposed certain amendments to the Directive, which included a number
of suggested changes which, if implemented, would amend or broaden the scope of the requirements
described above. Investors who are in any doubt as to their position should consult their professional
advisers.




                                                  - 42 -
                                      SUBSCRIPTION AND SALE

Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft, HSBC France and UniCredit Banka Slovenija d.d. (the "Joint Lead
Managers") and Abanka Vipa d.d., DZ BANK AG Deutsche Zentral-Genossenschaftsbank, Frankfurt am
Main, Erste Group Bank AG, Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG and Nova Ljubljanska banka d.d.,
Ljubljana (together with the Joint Lead Managers, the "Managers") have, in a subscription agreement
dated 9 March 2011 (the "Subscription Agreement") and made between the Issuer and the Managers
upon the terms and subject to the conditions contained therein, jointly and severally agreed to subscribe
for the New Notes at their issue price of 96.675 per cent. of their principal amount (plus 324 days'
accrued interest in respect of the period from, and including, 21 April 2010 to, but excluding, 11 March
2011) less a combined management and underwriting commission. The Issuer has also agreed to
reimburse the Managers for certain of their expenses incurred in connection with the management of the
issue of the New Notes. The Managers are entitled in certain circumstances to be released and discharged
from their obligations under the Subscription Agreement prior to the closing of the issue of the New
Notes.

United Kingdom

Each Manager has represented, warranted and undertaken that:

(a)     it has only communicated or caused to be communicated and will only communicate or cause to
        be communicated an invitation or inducement to engage in investment activity (within the
        meaning of Section 21 of the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 ("FSMA")) received by it
        in connection with the issue or sale of the New Notes in circumstances in which Section 21(1) of
        the FSMA does not apply to the Issuer; and

(b)     it has complied and will comply with all applicable provisions of the FSMA with respect to
        anything done by it in relation to the New Notes in, from or otherwise involving the United
        Kingdom.

United States of America

The New Notes have not been and will not be registered under the Securities Act and may not be offered
or sold within the United States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons except in certain
transactions exempt from the registration requirements of the Securities Act. Terms used in this
paragraph have the meanings given to them by Regulation S.

The New Notes are subject to U.S. tax law requirements and may not be offered, sold or delivered within
the United States or its possessions or to a United States person, except in certain transactions permitted
by U.S. tax regulations. Terms used in this paragraph have the meanings given to them by the United
States Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and regulations thereunder.

Each Manager has agreed that, except as permitted by the Subscription Agreement, it will not offer, sell
or deliver the New Notes, (a) as part of their distribution at any time or (b) otherwise, until 40 days after
the later of the commencement of the offering and the issue date of the New Notes, within the United
States or to, or for the account or benefit of, U.S. persons, and that it will have sent to each dealer to
which it sells New Notes during the distribution compliance period a confirmation or other notice setting
forth the restrictions on offers and sales of the New Notes within the United States or to, or for the
account or benefit of, U.S. persons. Terms used in this paragraph have the meanings given to them by
Regulation S.

In addition, until 40 days after commencement of the offering, an offer or sale of New Notes within the
United States by a dealer (whether or not participating in the offering) may violate the registration
requirements of the Securities Act.

General

No action has been or will be taken in any jurisdiction by the Issuer as the Managers that would, or is
intended to, permit a public offering of the New Notes, or possession or distribution of the Information
Memorandum, in any country or jurisdiction where action for that purpose is required.




                                                   - 43 -
Accordingly, each Manager has represented, warranted and undertaken that, to the best of its knowledge
and belief, it will comply with all applicable laws and regulations in each country or jurisdiction in which
it purchases, offers, sells or delivers New Notes or has in its possession or distributes this Information
Memorandum or any related offering material. Persons into whose hands this Information Memorandum
comes are required by the Issuer and the Managers to comply with all applicable laws and regulations in
each country or jurisdiction in which they purchase, offer, sell or deliver New Notes or possess, distribute
or publish this Information Memorandum or any other offering material relating to the New Notes, in all
cases at their own expense.




                                                  - 44 -
                                     GENERAL INFORMATION

Authorisation

1.      The creation and issue of the New Notes has been authorised by the Supervisory Board of the
        Issuer on 25 January 2011 and by the Credit Committee of the Issuer on 17 January 2011. The
        Notes are guaranteed by the Republic of Slovenia pursuant to Article 13 of the Slovenian Export
        and Development Bank Act (Zakon o Slovenski izvozni in razvojni banki, Uradni list RS, Nos
        56/2008 and 20/2009) which entered into force on 21 June 2008, became applicable on 18
        September 2008 and the amendment of which became effective on 17 March 2009.

Legal and Arbitration Proceedings

2.      There are no governmental, legal or arbitration proceedings (including any such proceedings
        which are pending or threatened, of which the Issuer is aware) which may have, or have had
        during the 12 months prior to the date of this Information Memorandum, a significant effect on
        the financial position or profitability of the Issuer.

Significant/Material Change

3.      Save as disclosed in this Information Memorandum, there has been no material adverse change in
        the prospects of the Issuer since 31 December 2009 nor any significant change in the financial or
        trading position of the Issuer since 31 December 2010.

Auditors

4.      The consolidated and non-consolidated financial statements of the Issuer, incorporated by
        reference herein, have been audited without qualification for the years ended 31 December 2009
        and 31 December 2008 by Deloitte revizija d.o.o. The consolidated and non-consolidated
        financial statements of the Issuer for the year ended 31 December 2009 were formally approved
        by the Supervisory Board of the Issuer on 22 April 2010.

Documents on Display

5.      Following the issue of the New Notes, copies of the following documents may be inspected
        during normal business hours at the Specified Office of each Paying Agent:

        (a)     Slovenian language version of Article 13 of the Act along with an English translation;

        (b)     the Supplemental Fiscal Agency Agreement; and

        (c)     the New Deed of Covenant.

6.      Following the issue of the New Notes, copies of the following documents will be available
        during normal business hours at the Specified Office of each Paying Agent:

        (a)     the consolidated and non-consolidated audited financial statements of the Issuer for the
                years ended 31 December 2008 and 31 December 2009 and the consolidated and non-
                consolidated unaudited financial statements for the year ended 31 December 2010; and

        (b)     the Articles of Association of the Issuer along with an English translation.

Yield

7.      On the basis of the issue price of the New Notes of 96.675 per cent. of their principal amount, the
        yield of the New Notes is 3.889 per cent. on an annual basis. It is not an indication of future
        yield.

Legend Concerning US Persons

8.      The New Notes and any Coupons appertaining thereto will bear a legend to the following effect:
        "Any United States person who holds this obligation will be subject to limitations under the




                                                 - 45 -
          United States income tax laws, including the limitations provided in Sections 165(j) and 1287(a)
          of the Internal Revenue Code.

ISIN and Common Code

9.        The New Notes have been accepted for clearance through Euroclear and Clearstream,
          Luxembourg. Until exchange of the New Temporary Global Note for the New Permanent Global
          Note, the New Notes will have a temporary ISIN of XS0605118966 and a common code of
          060511896. Thereafter, the New Notes will have been consolidated and form a single series with
          the Original Notes and the ISIN for this issue will be XS0504013912 and the Common Code will
          be 050401391, each being the same as for the Original Notes.

Managers transacting with the Issuer and the Guarantor

10.       Certain of the Managers and their affiliates have engaged, and may in the future engage, in
          investment banking and/or commercial banking transactions with, and may perform services to,
          the Issuer, the Guarantor and their respective affiliates in the ordinary course of business.

Listing

11.       Application has been made to list the New Notes on the Official List of the Luxembourg Stock
          Exchange and to trade them on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange's regulated market.




                                                  - 46 -
                                       THE ISSUER

                SID - Slovenska izvozna in razvojna banka, d.d., Ljubljana
                               Ulica Josipine Turnograjske 6
                                     Sl-1000 Ljubljana
                                 The Republic of Slovenia




FISCAL AGENT AND PRINCIPAL PAYING                   LUXEMBOURG LISTING AGENT
              AGENT

   Deutsche Bank AG, London Branch                   Deutsche Bank Luxembourg S.A.
            Winchester House                           2 Boulevard Konrad Adenauer
        1 Great Winchester Street                          L-1115 Luxembourg
            London EC2 2DB                                     Luxembourg
            United Kingdom



                               JOINT LEAD MANAGERS

    Deutsche Bank Aktiengesellschaft                            HSBC France
       Grosse Gallusstrasse 10–14                             c/o HSBC Bank plc
        60272 Frankfurt am Main                                8 Canada Square
               Germany                                         London E14 5HQ
                                                               United Kingdom

                             UniCredit Banka Slovenija d.d.
                                    Šmartinska 140
                                   SI-1000 Ljubljana
                                The Republic of Slovenia




                                    CO-MANAGERS

           Abanka Vipa d.d                                   DZ BANK AG
           Slovenska ulica 58                     Deutsche Zentral-Genossenschaftsbank,
             1000 Ljubljana                                Frankfurt am Main
        The Republic of Slovenia                            Platz der Republik
                                                         60265 Frankfurt am Main
                                                                 Germany

         Erste Group Bank AG                        Joh. Berenberg, Gossler & Co. KG
               Graben 21                                  Neuer Jungfernstieg 20
              1010 Vienna                                    20354 Hamburg
                Austria                                         Germany

                         Nova Ljubljanska banka d.d., Ljubljana
                                    Trg Republike 2
                                     1000 Ljubljana
                                The Republic of Slovenia




                                         - 47 -
                                    LEGAL ADVISERS

 To the Issuer as to English law:                    To the Issuer as to Slovenian law:

      Clifford Chance LLP                     Odvetniki Jurij Dolžan, Mitja Vidmar & Igor
      10 Upper Bank Street                                     Zemljarič
         London E14 5JJ                                    Slovenska Cesta 29
         United Kingdom                                      1000 Ljubljana
                                                        The Republic of Slovenia


To the Managers as to English law:                 To the Managers as to Slovenian law:

      Allen & Overy LLP                               Wolf Theiss Attorneys at Law
      One Bishops Square                                    Slovenian Branch
        London E1 6AD                                       Tivolska Cesta 30
       United Kingdom                                           Ljubljana
                                                        The Republic of Slovenia




                           AUDITORS TO THE ISSUER

                                Deloitte revizija d.o.o.
                                   Davčna ulica 1
                                   Ljubljana 1000
                               The Republic of Slovenia




                                        - 48 -
