3.

What are the considerations for intermediaries when categorising investment
products into different Product Categories?
Intermediaries can categorise products based on their existing practices and devise
Product Categories appropriate to their business such that investment products in the
same category would have similar terms and features, characteristics, nature and
extent of risks.
For instance, intermediaries should categorise the following types of product into
specific Product Categories so as to differentiate them from products of different
characteristics, nature and extent of risks, and/or to comply with existing productspecific regulatory requirements – (i) accumulators/decumulators, (ii) collective
investment schemes whose investment objective or principal investment strategy is
investing in insurance-linked securities, (iii) debt instruments with loss-absorption
features and related products, (iv) virtual assets (“VA”) and (v) VA-related products 1.

4.

What kinds of information should the Product Category Information Statement
cover?
To apply the Streamlined Approach, intermediaries should categorise investment
products based on their terms and features, characteristics, nature and extent of risks
and provide such information to clients by way of the Product Category Information
Statement. Where applicable, the Product Category Information Statement should
include warning statements in relation to the distribution of complex products.
Intermediaries should provide explanation upon request to facilitate the SPI’s
understanding of investment products within a Product Category.

5.

What should an SPI consider when specifying a Streamlining Threshold?
SPIs can specify a Streamlining Threshold appropriate to their circumstances (eg, their
financial situation, investment objectives and/or risk tolerance level) and the
intermediary is required to maintain proper records of setting any such threshold,
including the SPI’s rationale that provides support for setting such threshold. As an
illustrative example, a higher amount can be set considering the AUM maintained with
the intermediary represents an insignificant portion of the SPI’s portfolio and/or net
assets.

1

“VA-related products” refers to investment products which: (a) have a principal investment objective or strategy to
invest in virtual assets; (b) derive their value principally from the value and characteristics of virtual assets; or (c) track
or replicate the investment results or returns which closely match or correspond to virtual assets.
Page 2 of 3

