Annex 1

Streamlined approach for compliance with suitability obligations when dealing with
sophisticated professional investors
The following guidance aims to facilitate intermediaries’ application of a proportionate and
risk-based streamlining approach (the “Streamlined Approach”) for compliance with their
suitability obligations 1 when dealing with sophisticated professional investors (“SPIs”) who
possess higher levels of net worth and knowledge or experience.
Intermediaries should bear primary responsibilities for ensuring the maintenance of
appropriate standards of conduct and properly managing the risks associated with their
business operations. These include having effective systems and controls in place to guard
against misuse and detect red-flags arising from applying the Streamlined Approach.
Unless otherwise specified or the context otherwise requires, words and phrases in this
guidance shall be interpreted by reference to any definition of such word or phrase in the
Securities and Futures (Professional Investor) Rules, and/or the Code of Conduct for
Persons Licensed by or Registered with the Securities and Futures Commission.
(A) Qualifying criteria
1.

When dealing with Individual Professional Investors, intermediaries are required to
comply with the suitability obligations. Under the Streamlined Approach and for the
purpose of this guidance, an SPI refers to an Individual Professional Investor who has
at the relevant date satisfied the criteria on the financial situation specified in paragraph
3, knowledge or experience specified in paragraph 4 and investment objectives set out
in paragraph 5 below.

2.

A corporation which has as its principal business the holding of investments and is
wholly owned by one or more SPIs may be treated the same as the SPIs for the
purpose of this guidance.

3.

Financial situation

3.1 An SPI should have at the relevant date –
(a)

a portfolio of at least HK$40 million or its equivalent in any other currency; or

(b)

net assets, excluding primary residence, of at least HK$80 million or its equivalent
in any other currency.

3.2 When ascertaining the value of the portfolio of an SPI, intermediaries may take into
account one or more of the following –
(a)

a portfolio on the SPI’s own account;

1

This refers to the requirements (as set out under paragraph 5.2 and 5.5(a) of the Code of Conduct for Persons
Licensed by or Registered with the Securities and Futures Commission) that a licensed or registered person should
ensure any recommendation or solicitation for the client, or a transaction in complex product is suitable for the client in
all the circumstances.
Page 1 of 7

