When the client wishes to bind a new device to his/her internet trading account, the client is required to first login to the mobile/desktop application on the new device using his/her login credentials (ie, username and password).
The mobile/desktop application on the new device will then prompt the client to take selfie and complete the liveness checks.
The mobile/desktop application collects this information and verify it against the information stored in the Database, which is independent of the device's native biometric authentication functions.
If the data collected matches the data stored in the Database, the new device will be bound.
Example 3 - Personal identity document verification
When the client wishes to bind a new device to his/her internet trading account, the client is required to first login to the mobile/desktop trading application on the new device using his/her login credentials (ie, username and password).
The mobile/desktop trading application on the new device will then prompt the client to capture images of his/her identity document (for example, Hong Kong identity card) from different angles to verify authenticity of the document.
The mobile/desktop trading application will extract the unique identity number from the document by utilising Optical Character Recognition technology, and cross-check it with the identity record previously collected during the account opening process and stored in the Database.
The client will be prompted to take a selfie, which will be matched against the photo on the identity document, thereby preventing authentication using stolen documents.
If the data of the identity document matches the data stored in the Database, the new device will be bound.
Example 4 - Physical verification
When a client wishes to bind a new device to his/her internet trading account, the client may visit the internet broker's or VASP's office in person for identity verification. This process would generally require the client to present valid identity documents that match the internet broker's or VASP's internal records, together with the device intended for binding, and, where appropriate, other additional supporting proof of identity.