 

When the client wishes to bind a new device to his/her internet trading account, the client
is required to first login to the mobile/desktop application on the new device using his/her
login credentials (ie, username and password).

e The mobile/desktop application on the new device will then prompt the client to take
selfie and complete the liveness checks.

e The mobile/desktop application collects this information and verify it against the
information stored in the Database, which is independent of the device’s native
biometric authentication functions.

e If the data collected matches the data stored in the Database, the new device will be
bound.

 

 

Example 3 — Personal identity document verification

When the client wishes to bind a new device to his/her internet trading account, the client
is required to first login to the mobile/desktop trading application on the new device using
his/her login credentials (ie, username and password).

e The mobile/desktop trading application on the new device will then prompt the client to
capture images of his/her identity document (for example, Hong Kong identity card)
from different angles to verify authenticity of the document.

e The mobile/desktop trading application will extract the unique identity number from the
document by utilising Optical Character Recognition technology, and cross-check it
with the identity record previously collected during the account opening process and
stored in the Database.

e The client will be prompted to take a selfie, which will be matched against the photo
on the identity document, thereby preventing authentication using stolen documents.

e If the data of the identity document matches the data stored in the Database, the new
device will be bound.

 

 

Example 4 — Physical verification

When a client wishes to bind a new device to his/her internet trading account, the client
may visit the internet broker’s or VASP’s office in person for identity verification. This
process would generally require the client to present valid identity documents that match
the internet broker’s or VASP’s internal records, together with the device intended for
binding, and, where appropriate, other additional supporting proof of identity.

 

 

 

54/F, One Island East.
5 325 08) RGR ER 18
+852 2231 1222

stlands Road, Quarry Bay, Hong Kong
BRP 541g
n.sfc.hk Page 4 of 4

 
 
   
